Simulating and analyzing order book data:
The queue-reactive model
Weibing Huang1;2, Charles-Albert Lehalle3and Mathieu Rosenbaum1
1LPMA, University Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 6)
2Kepler-Cheuvreux
3Capital Fund Management
September 5, 2014
Abstract
Through the analysis of a dataset of ultra high frequency order book updates, we introduce
a model which accommodates the empirical properties of the full order book together with
the stylized facts of lower frequency nancial data. To do so, we split the time interval of
interest into periods in which a well chosen reference price, typically the midprice, remains
constant. Within these periods, we view the limit order book as a Markov queuing system.
Indeed, we assume that the intensities of the order ows only depend on the current state
of the order book. We establish the limiting behavior of this model and estimate its
parameters from market data. Then, in order to design a relevant model for the whole
period of interest, we use a stochastic mechanism that allows to switch from one period of
constant reference price to another. Beyond enabling to reproduce accurately the behavior
of market data, we show that our framework can be very useful for practitioners, notably
as a market simulator or as a tool for the transaction cost analysis of complex trading
algorithms.
Keywords: Limit order book, market microstructure, high frequency data, queuing model,
jump Markov process, ergodic properties, volatility, mechanical volatility, market simulator,
execution probability, transaction costs analysis, market impact.
1 Introduction
Electronic limit order books (LOB for short), where market participants send their buy and
sell orders via a continuous-time double auction system, are nowadays the dominant mode of
exchange on nancial markets. Consequently, understanding the LOB dynamics has become a
fundamental issue. Indeed, a deep knowledge of the LOB's behavior enables policy makers to
design relevant regulations, market makers to provide liquidity at cheaper prices, and investors
to save transaction costs while mounting and unwinding their positions, thus reducing the cost
of capital of listed companies. Furthermore, it can also provide insights on the macroscopic
features of the price which emerges from the LOB.
1arXiv:1312.0563v2  [q-fin.TR]  3 Sep 2014

In the seminal work on zero intelligence LOB models of Smith, Farmer, Gillemot, and Krishna-
murthy (2003), a mean-eld approach is suggested in order to study the properties of the LOB.
In such models, the underlying assumption is that the order ows follow independent Poisson
processes. Although this hypothesis is not really compatible with empirical observations, the
authors show that its simplicity allows for the derivation of many interesting formulas, some of
them being testable on market data. This work has been followed by numerous developments.
For example, in Cont, Stoikov, and Talreja (2010), the probabilities of various order book re-
lated events are computed in this framework, whereas stability conditions of the system are
studied in Abergel and Jedidi (2011). We wish to extend this approach in two directions. On
the one hand, we want our model to be more consistent with market data, so that we can give
new insights on the dynamics of the LOB. On the other hand, we aim at providing a useful and
relevant tool for market practitioners, notably in the perspective of transaction costs analysis.
Under the rst in rst out rule (which we assume in the sequel), a LOB can be considered as
a high-dimensional queuing system, where orders arrive and depart randomly. We consider the
three following types of orders:
Limit orders: insertion of a new order in the LOB (a buy order at a lower price than the
best ask price, or a sell order at a higher price than the best bid price).
Cancellation orders: cancellation of an already existing order in the LOB.
Market orders: consumption of available liquidity (a buy or sell order at the best available
price).
In practice, market participants (or their algorithms) analyze many quantities before sending
a given order at a given level. One of the most important variables in this decision process is
probably the distance between their target price and their \reference market price", typically
the midprice. This reference price is linked with the order ows since it is usually determined
by the LOB state. This interconnection makes the design of LOB models quite intricate. To
overcome this diculty, we split the time interval of interest into periods of constant reference
price, and consider two parts in our modeling. First, we study the LOB as a Markov queuing
system during the time periods when the reference price is constant. Then, we investigate the
dynamics of the reference price. Such a framework is particularly suitable for large tick assets1,
for which constant reference price periods are quite long and allow for accurate parameter es-
timations.
Two kinds of public information are available to market participants at the high frequency
scale: the historical order ows and the current state of the LOB. In this paper, we are mostly
interested in how the state of the LOB impacts market participants decisions. Surprisingly
enough, this question has been rarely considered in the literature. Let us mention as an excep-
tion the interesting approach in Gareche, Disdier, Kockelkoren, and Bouchaud (2013), where
the impact of the LOB state on the queue dynamics is analyzed through PDE type arguments.
Within periods of constant reference price, we model the LOB as a continuous-time Markov
jump process, and estimate its innitesimal generator matrix under various assumptions on the
1A large tick asset is dened as an asset whose bid-ask spread is almost always equal to one tick, see Dayri
and Rosenbaum (2012). In practice, our framework can be considered relevant for any asset whose average
spread is smaller than 2.5 ticks.
2

information set used by market participants. From these results, we are able to analyze how
market participants react towards dierent congurations of the LOB. Furthermore, we provide
the asymptotic distributions of the LOB. The level of realism of our approaches is assessed by
comparing expected features from the models with empirical ones. Thus, all our developments
are illustrated on two specic examples of large tick stocks on Euronext Paris: France Telecom
and Alcatel-Lucent (in appendix).
In the second part of the paper, we extend our framework by allowing reference price moves,
so that our model also accommodates macroscopic properties of the asset (roughly summarized
by the volatility). Modications of the reference price2will possibly occur provided one of the
best queues is totally depleted or a new order is inserted within the spread. This model is
called \queue-reactive model". In particular, it enables us to bring to light a quantity, the
\maximal mechanical volatility", which represents the amount of price volatility generated by
the generic randomness of the order ows. In practice, this parameter is typically smaller than
the empirical volatility estimated from market data. The reason for this is simple: the market
does not evolve like a closed physical system, where the only source of randomness would be the
endogenous interactions between participants. It is also subject to external informations, such
as the news, which increase the volatility of the price. Hence, it will be necessary to introduce
an exogenous component within the queue-reactive model.
Throughout the paper, we illustrate the fact that many useful short term predictions can be
computed in our framework: execution probabilities of passive orders, probability of price in-
crease. . . More importantly, we show that the queue-reactive model turns out to be a very
relevant market simulator, notably in view of the analysis of complex trading tactics, using for
example a mixture of market and limit orders.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we consider periods when the reference price is
constant. We rst present a very general framework for the LOB dynamics and then introduce
three specic models. The rst one is a birth and death process in which the queues are
assumed to be independent. In this setting, we are able to fully characterize the asymptotic
behavior of the LOB. The second approach is a queuing system in which the bid and ask sides
are independent, but the rst two lines on each side can exhibit correlations. We show that
this model can be seen as a quasi birth and death process (QBD for short) and thus admits a
matrix geometric solution as its invariant distribution. In the last approach, we allow for cross
dependences between bid and ask queues. An application of these models to the computation of
execution probabilities is presented at the end of the same section. In Section 3, we investigate
the dynamics of the reference price. In particular, we build the queue-reactive model which is a
relevant LOB model for the whole time period of interest. We end this section by showing how
our framework can be used for transaction costs and market impact analysis of high frequency
trading strategies. A conclusion and some perspectives are given in Section 4. Some proofs and
further empirical results are gathered in an appendix.
2Note that the reference price will not be exactly the midprice, see Section 2.2.
3

2 Dynamics of the LOB in a period of constant reference
price
Within time periods when the reference price is constant, we consider three dierent models for
the LOB. These models can be jointly introduced through the general framework we present
now.
2.1 General Framework
In the general framework, the LOB is seen as a 2 K-dimensional vector, where Kdenotes
the number of available limits on each side3, see Figure 1. The reference price prefdenes
the center of the 2 K-dimensional vector, and divides the LOB into two parts: the bid side
[Q i:i= 1;:::;K ] and the ask side [ Qi:i= 1;:::;K ], whereQi4represents the limit at the
distancei 0:5 ticks to the right (+ i) or to the left ( i) ofpref. The number of orders at Qi
is denoted by qi. We assume that on the bid (resp. ask) side, market participants send buy
(resp. sell) limit orders, cancel existing buy (resp. sell) orders and send sell (resp. buy) market
orders. We consider a constant order size at each limit. However, the order sizes at the dierent
limits are allowed to be dierent. In practice, these sizes can be chosen as the average event
sizes observed at each limit Qi(AES ifor short)5.
The 2K-dimensional process X(t) = (q K(t);:::;q 1(t);q1(t);:::;q K(t)) is then modeled as a
continuous-time Markov jump process in the countable state space 
 = N2K, with jump size
equal to one. For q= (q K;:::;q 1;q1;:::;q K)2
, andei= (a K;:::;a i;:::;a K), whereaj= 0
forj6=iandai= 1, the components Qq;pof the innitesimal generator matrix Qof the process
X(t) are assumed to be of the following form:
Qq;q+ei=fi(q)
Qq;q ei=gi(q)
Qq;q= X
q2
;p6=qQq;p
Qq;p= 0;otherwise.
We now give a theoretical result on the ergodicity of the system under two very general as-
sumptions. Let us denote by Pq;p(t) the transition probability from state qto statepin a time
t. Recall that a Markov process in a countable state space is said to be ergodic if there exists
a probability measure that satises P=(is called invariant measure) and for every q
andp:
lim
t!1Pq;p(t) =p:
We consider the two following assumptions.
3Note that an empty limit can be part of the LOB in our setting.
4To simplify our notations, we write i/ iasi, and i/iasi.
5In our framework, AES iis a more suitable choice than ATS (Average Trade Size) that computes only the
average size of market orders, see Section 5.5 in appendix for more details.
4

Figure 1: Limit order book
Assumption 1. (Negative individual drift) There exist a positive integer Cbound and > 0,
such that for all iand allq2
, ifqi>C bound ,
fi(q) gi(q)< :
Assumption 2. (Bound on the incoming ow) There exists a positive number Hsuch that for
anyq2
,X
i2[ K;:::; 1;1;:::;K ]fi(q)H:
Assumption 1 can be interpreted as follows: the queue size of a limit tends to decrease when
it becomes too large. Assumption 2 ensures no explosion in the system: the order arrival
speed stays bounded for any given state of the LOB. Under these two assumptions, we have
the following ergodicity result for the 2 K-dimensional queuing system. The proof is given in
appendix.
Theorem 2.1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the 2K-dimensional Markov jump process X(t)is
ergodic.
This theorem is the basis for the asymptotic study of the LOB dynamics in the following
sections.
2.2 Data description and estimation of the reference price
2.2.1 The database
The data used in our empirical studies are collected from Cheuvreux's6LOB database, from
January 2010 to March 2012, on Euronext Paris. It records the LOB data (prices, volume and
number of orders) up to the fth best limit on both sides, whenever the LOB state changes.
Note that we remove market data corresponding to the rst and last hour of trading, as these
6Cheuvreux is a brokerage rm based in Paris, formerly a subsidiary of Cr edit Agricole Corporate Investment
Bank, and now merged with Kepler Capital Market.
5

periods have usually specic features because of the opening/closing auction phases. Two large
tick European stocks, France Telecom and Alcatel-Lucent, are studied and they exhibit very
similar behaviors. Some characteristics of these two stocks are given in Table 1. We have chosen
the stock France Telecom as illustration example for all the developments in the sequel. The
results for Alcatel-Lucent can be found in appendix. Although only stocks are considered in
this paper, our method applies also to other nancial assets, such as interest rates or index
futures (among which large tick assets are quite numerous, see Dayri and Rosenbaum (2012)).
stock average number of average number of average spread size
orders per day trades per day (in number of ticks)
France Telecom 159250 7282 1.43
Alcatel Lucent 129400 8626 1.99
Table 1: Data description
2.2.2 Estimation of the reference price
As mentioned in the introduction, the estimation of a relevant reference price prefis the basis
for dening the limits in the order book. Indeed, prefprovides the center point of the LOB and
thus the positions of the 2 Klimits. In our framework, if we write pifor the price level of the
limitQi,i= K;:::; 1;1;:::;K , we must have
pref=p1+p 1
2:
When the observed bid-ask spread is equal to one tick, prefis obviously taken as the midprice
(denoted by pmid) and both Q1andQ 1are non empty. When it is larger than one tick, several
choices are possible for pref. We build preffrom the data the following way: when the spread
is odd (in tick unit), it is still natural to use pmidas the LOB center:
pref=pmid=(pbestbid +pbestask )
2:
When it is even, pmidis no longer appropriate since it is now itself a possible position for order
arrivals. In such case, we use either
pmid+tick size
2orpmid tick size
2;
choosing the one which is the closest to the previous value of pref. Note that more complex
methods could be used for the estimation of pref, see for example Delattre, Robert, and Rosen-
baum (2013).
2.3 Model I: Collection of independent queues
We now give a rst simple LOB model around a xed reference price.
6

2.3.1 Description of the model
In this model, we assume independence between the ows arriving at dierent limits in the
LOB. Three types of orders are considered: limit orders, cancellations and market orders. We
suppose that the intensities of these point processes at dierent limits are only functions of the
target queue size (that is the available volume at the considered limit Qi). Furthermore, at a
given limit, conditional on the LOB state, the arrival processes of the three types of orders are
taken independent. The values of these intensities are denoted by L
i(n) (limit orders), C
i(n)
(cancellations) and M
i(n) (market orders) when qi=n. Moreover, the intensity functions at
QiandQ iare chosen identical, considering the symmetry property of the LOB. We then have
L
i(n) =L
 i(n);C
i(n) =C
 i(n);M
i(n) =M
 i(n), and
fi(q) =L
i(qi)
gi(q) =C
i(qi) +M
i(qi):
In this model, market orders sent to Qiconsume directly the volume available at Qi. Therefore,
we can have a market order at the second limit while the rst limit is not empty. However,
for large tick assets, this assumption is reasonable as their market order ow is almost fully
concentrated on rst limits ( Q1) and the estimated intensities of this ow at ( Qi),i6= 1 are
very small. Under these assumptions, the LOB becomes a collection of 2 Kindependent queues,
each of them being a birth and death process.
2.3.2 Empirical study: Collection of independent queues
In Model I, the intensities of the dierent queues can be estimated separately. The value of Kis
set to 3, as our numerical experiments show that for the considered stocks, both the dynamics
and empirical distributions at Qi;i= 4;5 are quite similar to that at Q3. This value of K
will also apply to other experiments in the paper.
The estimation method goes as follows. We dene an \event" !as any modication of the
queue size. For queue Qi, we record the waiting time  ti(!) (in number of seconds) between
the event!and the preceding event at Qi, the type of the event Ti(!) and the queue size qi(!)
before the event. The queue size is then approximated by the smallest integer that is larger
than or equal to the volume available at the queue, divided by the stock's average event size
AES iat the corresponding queue. We set the \type" of the event !the following way:
Ti(!)2E+for limit order insertion at Qi,
Ti(!)2E for limit order cancellation at Qi,
Ti(!)2Etfor market order at Qi.
When the reference price changes, we restart the recording process. Once we have collected
(ti(!);Ti(!);qi(!)) from historical data, it is easy to estimate L
i(n),C
i(n) andM
i(n) by the
maximum likelihood method:
7

010 20 30 40 50 00.5 11.5 22.5 33.5 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Limit order insertion intensity, Model I 
  
First limit 
Second limit 
Third limit 
010 20 30 40 50 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Limit order cancellation intensity, Model I 
  
First limit 
Second limit 
Third limit 
010 20 30 40 50 -0.05 00.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Market order arrival intensity, Model I 
  
First limit 
Second limit 
Third limit Figure 2: Intensities at Qi,i= 1;2;3, France Telecom
^i(n) = 
mean(ti(!)jqi(!) =n) 1
^L
i(n) = ^i(n)#fTi(!)2E+;qi(!) =ng
#fqi(!) =ng
^C
i(n) = ^i(n)#fTi(!)2E ;qi(!) =ng
#fqi(!) =ng
^M
i(n) = ^i(n)#fTi(!)2Et;qi(!) =ng
#fqi(!) =ng;
where \mean" denotes the empirical mean and # Athe cardinality of the set A.
In Figure 2, we present the estimated intensities. Data at QiandQ iare aggregated together
(simply by combining the two collected samples) and condence intervals (dotted lines) are
computed using central limit approximations detailed in appendix. We now comment the
obtained graphs.
Behaviors under the independence assumption
Limit order insertion:
Q1: The intensity of the limit order insertion process is approximately a constant function
of the queue size, with a signicantly smaller value at 0. Note that inserting a limit
order in an empty queue creates a new best limit and the market participant placing
this order is the only one standing at this price level. Such action is often risky.
Indeed, when the spread is dierent from one tick, one is quite uncertain about the
position of the so-called \ecient" or \fair" price, see for example Delattre, Robert,
and Rosenbaum (2013) for discussions on this notion. This smaller value can also be
due to temporary realizations of the structural relation between the bid-ask spread
and the volatility: if the spread is large because the inventory risk of market makers
is high, the probability that anyone inserts a limit order in the spread is likely to
be low, see among others Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997), Avellaneda
8

and Stoikov (2008), Wyart, Bouchaud, Kockelkoren, Potters, and Vettorazzo (2008)
and Dayri and Rosenbaum (2012) for more details about market making and the
relation between spread, volatility and inventory risk.
Q2: The intensity is now approximately a decreasing function of the queue size. This
interesting result probably reveals a quite common strategy used in practice: posting
orders at the second limit when the corresponding queue size is small to seize priority.
More details on this strategy are given in Section 2.4.2.
Q3: The intensity function shows similar properties to that at the second limit.
Limit order cancellation:
Q1: The rate of order cancellation is an increasing concave function for q1between 0 and
25, and becomes at/slightly decreasing for larger values. This result is in contrast
to the classical way to model this ow, where one often considers a linearly increasing
cancellation rate, see for example Cont, Stoikov, and Talreja (2010). On this rst in
rst out market, the priority value, that is the advantage of a limit order compared
with another limit order standing at the rear of the same queue, can be one of the
reasons for this behavior. Indeed, the priority value is an increasing function of the
queue size and orders having a high priority value are less likely to be canceled.
Q2: The rate of order cancellation attains more rapidly its asymptotic value, which is
lower than for Q1. Compared to the rst limit case, market participants at the
second limit have even stronger intention not to cancel their orders when the queue
size increases. This is probably due to the fact that these orders are less exposed
to short term market trends than those posted at Q1(since they are covered by
the volume standing at Q1and their price level is farther away from the reference
price).
Q3: The priority value is smaller at the third limit since it takes longer time for Q3to
become the best quote if it does. The rate of order cancellation increases almost
linearly for queue sizes larger than 3 AES 3. We also nd a quite large cancellation
rate when the queue size is equal to one, which shows that market participants cancel
their orders more quickly when they nd themselves alone in the queue.
Market orders:
Q1: The rate decreases exponentially with the available volume at Q1. This phenomena
is easily explained by market participants \rushing for liquidity" when liquidity is
rare, and \waiting for better price" when liquidity is abundant.
Q2: In practice, market orders can arrive at Q2only ifQ1= 0 (that is when Q2is
the best oer queue). The shape of the intensity is very similar to the one obtained
in the case of Q1. The values are of course much smaller.
Q3: In some rare cases, one can still nd some market orders arriving at Q3(market
orders occurring when the spread is large). The intensity function remains exponen-
tially decreasing.
9

2.3.3 Asymptotic behavior under Model I
The invariant distribution of the LOB can be computed explicitly in Model I. We denote by i
the stationary distribution of the limit Qi, and dene the arrival/departure ratio vector iby
i(n) =L
i(n)
(C
i(n+ 1) +M
i(n+ 1)):
Then the following result for the invariant distribution is easily obtained, see for example Gross
and Harris (1998):
i(n) =i(0)nY
j=1i(j 1)
i(0) = 
1 +1X
n=1nY
j=1i(j 1) 1:
Hence the long term behavior of the LOB is completely determined by . This implies that two
assets can have very dierent ow dynamics, but still the same invariant distribution provided
that their arrival/departure ratios are the same.
We now compare the asymptotic results of the model with the empirical distributions observed
atQ1,Q2andQ3. To compute these empirical laws, we use a sampling frequency of 30
seconds (every 30 seconds, we look at the LOB and record its state)7. The results are gathered
in Figure 3, as well as the invariant distributions from a Poisson model (constant limit/market
order arrival rate, linear cancellation rate, parameters estimated from the same dataset).
One can see that the invariant distributions approximate very well the empirical distributions
of the LOB. This shows that in order to explain the shape of the LOB, such mean-eld type
approach, where the LOB prole arises from interactions between the average behaviors of
market participants, can be very relevant.
2.4 Model II: Dependent case
We now present some extensions of Model I. We assume here that buy/sell market orders
consume volume at the best quote limits, dened as the rst non empty ask/bid queue. Thus,
we consider a buy market order process with intensity M
buyand a sell market order process with
intensityM
sell. The limit order, cancellation, and market order arrival processes are assumed to
be independent conditional on the LOB state. So we can write fi(q) andgi(q) in the following
form:
fi(q) =L
i(q)
gi(q) =C
i(q) +M
buy(q)1bestask (q)=i;ifi>0
gi(q) =C
i(q) +M
sell(q)1bestbid (q)=i;ifi<0:
7Other sampling frequencies have also been tested and the estimated distributions are found to be very
similar. These sampled data will also be used to estimate the joint distributions of the LOB limits in Model IIa
and IIb.
10

010 20 30 40 50 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 First limit 
Queue Size (in AES) Distribution 
  
010 20 30 40 50 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 Second limit 
Queue Size (in AES) Distribution 
  
010 20 30 40 50 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 Third limit 
Queue Size (in AES) Distribution 
  
Empirical estimation 
Model I 
Poisson modelEmpirical estimation 
Model I 
Poisson modelEmpirical estimation 
Model I 
Poisson modelFigure 3: Model I, invariant distributions of q1;q2;q3, France Telecom
As for Model I, we consider some bid-ask symmetry, that is, for q= [q 3;q 2;q 1;q1;q2;q3],q0=
[q3;q2;q1;q 1;q 2;q 3] andi= 1;2;3,L
i(q) =L
 i(q0),M
i(q) =M
 i(q0) andM
buy(q) =M
sell(q0) .
2.4.1 Model IIa: Two sets of dependent queues
Institutional traders and brokers tend to place most of their limit orders at best limits, while
many market makers, arbitragers and other high frequency traders stand also in queues beyond
these best limits. This suggests for example that the dynamics at Q2may not only depend on
q2, but also on whether or not Q1is empty. We thus propose to use the following intensity
functions for the queue Q2: in this model, L
2andC
2are functions of q2and1q1>0.
Intensities at Qi;i6=2 remain functions of qionly. For large tick assets, the probability that
Qi;i3 is the best limit is negligible. It is thus reasonable to also assume that market orders
are only sent to Q1andQ2. This enables us to keep the independence property between Q3
and (Q1;Q2). Whenq1>0, the market order intensity M
buy=sell is assumed to be a function
ofq1; whenq1= 0, it is a function of q2only.
2.4.2 Model IIa: Empirical study
In this empirical study, our goal is to understand how market participants make trading de-
cisions atQ2in two dierent situations: q1= 0 andq1>0. Since we are now studying
a two-dimensional problem, the data recording process is slightly dierent. In particular, for
(Q1;Q2), it goes as follows: we record the waiting times  ti(!) between events that happen at
Q1orQ2, the type of event T(!) and the two queue sizes ( q1(!);q2(!)) before the event. The
maximum likelihood method is again used to estimate the intensity functions L
i,C
i,M
ifor
i= 1;2. Fori= 1 andi= 3, as the dynamics at Qionly depend on the queue size at Qi,
the estimated values of L
1;C
1andM
1are very close to those obtained in Model I and are not
shown here. The estimated intensity functions at Q2are given in Figure 4. Some comments
are in order:
Limit order insertion: Both curves are decreasing functions of the queue size. In the
rst case (q1= 0), the limit order insertion intensity reaches very rapidly its asymptotic
value. The relatively high value observed for q2= 0 is probably due to the fact that
for large tick assets, market makers rarely allow for spreads larger than 3 ticks. In the
11

010 20 30 40 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Second limit, limit order insertion 
  
q1 == 0 
q1 > 0 
010 20 30 40 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Second limit, limit order cancellation 
  
q1 == 0 
q1 > 0 
010 20 30 40 00.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Second limit, market order insertion 
  
q1 == 0 
q1 > 0 Figure 4: Intensities at Q2as functions of 1 q1>0andq2, France Telecom
second case ( q1>0), the intensity continues to go down to a much lower value. This
is likely to be related to the arbitrage strategy introduced in Section 2.3.2: post passive
orders at a non-best limit when its size is small, wait for this limit to eventually become
the best limit and then gain the prot from having the priority value. For example, when
the considered limit becomes the best one, one can decide to stay in the queue if its size
is large enough to cover the risk of short term market trend, or to cancel the orders if the
queue size is too small.
Limit order cancellation: The cancellation rate is higher when q1= 0. This can be
related to the concentration of the trading activity at best limits. When q1>0, the
cancellation rate is quite large when q2= 1, as it is the case at Q3(see Section 2.3.2).
Market orders: No market order can arrive at Q2when there are still limit orders at
Q1(cross limits large market orders that consume several limits are treated as several
market orders that arrive sequentially at those limits within a very short time period).
The market order arrival rate when Q2is the best limit is not very dierent from that at
Q1, but shows a rather unexpected increasing trend when the queue size becomes larger
than 5 AES 2.
2.4.3 Model IIa: Asymptotic behavior
Model IIabelongs to a special class of Markov processes, called quasi birth and death processes
(QBD). Their asymptotic behavior can be studied by the matrix geometric method. Deni-
tions of QBD processes and explanations about the matrix geometric method can be found in
appendix. In Figure 5, we show the theoretical joint distribution of ( q1;q2) for the stock France
Telecom and compare it with the joint distribution estimated from empirical data. Here also,
we see that the theoretical results provide a very satisfying approximation.
12

Figure 5: Model IIa: joint distribution of q1;q2, France Telecom
2.4.4 Model IIb: Modeling bid-ask dependences
We now study the interactions between the bid queues and the ask queues. Let Q0,Q ,Q,
Q+be four marks which represent in the following ranges of values for the queue sizes. Let m
andlbe two integers. We dene the function Sm;l(x):
Sm;l(x) =Q0ifx= 0
Sm;l(x) =Q if 0<xm
Sm;l(x) = Qifm<xl
Sm;l(x) =Q+ifx>l:
This function associates to a queue size xfour possible ranges: empty: x= 0, small: x2(0;m],
usual:x2(m;l] and large: x2(l;+1). We setmas the 33% lower quantile and las the 33%
upper quantile of q1(conditional on positive values). In this model, market participants at
Q1adjust their behavior not only according to the target queue size, but also to the size of the
opposite queue. The rates L
1andC
1are therefore modeled as functions of q1andSm;l(q1).
As in Model IIa, we suppose that market orders consume volume at the best limits and are
only sent to Q1andQ2. Whenq1>0, the market order intensity M
buy=sell is assumed to
be a function of q1andSm;l(q1). Regime switching at Q2is kept in this model: L
2,C
2
are assumed to be functions of 1q1>0andq2, and when q1= 0, the market order intensity
M
buy=sell is modeled as a function of q2.
Under these assumptions, the 2 K-dimensional problem is reduced to the study of the 4-
dimensional continuous-time Markov jump process ( Q 2;Q 1;Q1;Q2). One important feature
of this model is that the queues Q2have no inuence on the dynamics at Q1. Therefore, we
only need to study the 3-dimensional process ( Q 1;Q1;Q2) (or even the 2-dimensional process
(Q 1;Q1) if one is only interested in the dynamics at Q1. Remark also that other choices for
the specication of the intensity functions at Q1are possible. For example, one can consider
them as functions of the rst level bid/ask imbalance, dened asq1 q 1
q1+q 1, or simply as functions
of the spread size.
13

010 20 30 40 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11.2 1.4 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) First limit, limit order insertion 
  q(-1) = 0 
0<q(-1)<=4 
4 < q(-1) <= 9 
q(-1) > 9 
010 20 30 40 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11.2 1.4 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) First limit, limit order cancellation 
  q(-1) = 0 
0<q(-1)<=4 
4 < q(-1) <= 9 
q(-1) > 9 
010 20 30 40 00.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) First limit, market order insertion 
  
q(-1) = 0 
0<q(-1)<=4 
4 < q(-1) <= 9 
q(-1) > 9 Figure 6: Intensities at Q1as functions ofSm;l(q 1) andq1, France Telecom
2.4.5 Model IIb: Empirical study
We focus here on the estimation of the intensity functions at Q1. We consider the depar-
ture ow intensities C
1(q1;Sm;l(q1)) andM
buy=sell (q1;Sm;l(q1)), and the arrival ow inten-
sitiesL
1(q1;Sm;l(q1)). Using again the symmetry property of the LOB, we take L
1(x;y) =
L
 1(x;y),C
1(x;y) =C
 1(x;y) andM
sell(x;y) =M
buy(x;y). We record the waiting times  t(!)
between events that happen at Q1orQ 1, the types of event T(!) and the two queue sizes
(q1(!);q 1(!)) before the event. Then we estimate these intensity functions using the maxi-
mum likelihood method. The results are shown in Figure 6 ( m= 4 AES 1,l= 9 AES 1)8. Some
remarks are in order:
Limit order insertion: The limit order insertion rate is a decreasing function of the opposite
queue size. In particular, we see that when the opposite queue is empty (pink curve),
it is signicantly larger. Indeed, in that case, the \ecient" price is likely to be closer
to the opposite side. Therefore limit orders at the non empty rst limit are likely to be
protable.
Limit order cancellation: The cancellation rates for dierent ranges of Q 1are similar in
their forms but have dierent asymptotic values. This rate is not surprisingly a decreasing
function of the liquidity level on the opposite side. Indeed, when this level becomes low,
many market participants cancel their limit orders and send market orders since the
market is likely to move in an unfavorable direction.
Market orders: We see that when the liquidity available on the opposite side is abundant,
more market orders are sent. Indeed, in that case, transactions at the target queue are
relatively cheap as its price level is temporarily closer to the ecient price. In the special
situationq 1= 0, the price level at Q1can seem relatively attractive since it is much
closer to the reference price than the opposite best price, which is in that case 2 ticks
away from it. This explains why the market order intensity is larger when the opposite
queue is empty than when its size is small.
8Note that the computation of the condence intervals becomes more intricate for this model and the results
presented are slightly approximate ones, see details in appendix.
14

Figure 7: Model IIb: joint distribution of q 1;q1, France Telecom
Figure 8: Model III: joint distribution of q 1;q1, France Telecom
2.4.6 Model IIb: Asymptotic behavior
Monte-Carlo simulations are used to obtain the theoretical invariant distribution of the LOB in
Model IIb. The theoretical and empirical joint distributions of Q 1andQ1are shown in Figure
7. The dierence between the two graphs comes from the relatively high probabilities of states
of the form ( x;y) withxandyboth small in empirical data, which are somehow replaced by
states of the form ( x;0) or (0;y) in the model. Indeed, in practice, a situation where one of
the rst queue is empty is not likely to remain long since it often leads to a reference price
change. This eect is not taken into account in Model IIbwhere the reference price is constant,
but will be investigated in Model III in Section 3.1. We anticipate here by giving in Figure 8
the joint distribution obtained when suitable moves of the reference price are added within the
framework of Model IIb(following the approach of Model III in Section 3.1). We now nd that
the simulated density becomes very close to the empirical one.
15

Initial Ask 1 Size Initial Bid 1 Size Model I 
  
510 15 20 25 30 10 20 30 
Initial Ask 1 Size Initial Bid 1 Size Model II(a) 
  
510 15 20 25 30 10 20 30 
Initial Ask 1 Size Initial Bid 1 Size Model II(b) 
  
510 15 20 25 30 10 20 30 
Initial Ask 1 Size Initial Bid 1 Size Poisson model
  
510 15 20 25 30 10 20 30 
00.5 1
00.5 1
00.5 1
00.5 1Figure 9: Execution probability of a buying order placed at Q 1att= 0, France Telecom
2.5 Example of application: Probability of execution
The preceding models can be used to compute short term predictions about several important
LOB related quantities. One relevant example is the probability of executing an order before
the midprice moves. Suppose that at time t= 0, bothQ1andQ 1are not empty. Then a
trader (called A) submits a buy limit order at Q 1of sizen0and waits in the queue until
either the order is executed or the opposite queue Q1is totally depleted. The probability of
execution can be computed in all of the three preceding models, using Monte-Carlo simulations.
There are two types of orders at Q 1: orders placed before t= 0, thus having higher priority
compared with the order of trader A, and orders placed after t= 0, having lower priority.
When a market order arrives at Q 1, the limit order with the highest priority is executed.
Hence trader A's order starts being executed only when all orders placed at Q 1beforet= 0
have been either canceled or executed. When a cancellation event happens at Q 1, the precise
order being canceled is not clearly dened in our models. So, we need to make two additional
assumptions for the cancellation process.
Assumption 3. When a cancellation event occurs at Q 1, orders atQ 1have the same proba-
bility of being canceled (except for the limit order submitted by trader A, which is never canceled).
Assumption 4. The cancellation intensity at Q 1is supposed to be equal to C
1(q 1)q 1 n0
q 1
instead ofC
1(q 1), since the order placed by trader A is never canceled.
Orders with lower priority are actually more likely to be canceled, see Gareche, Disdier, Kock-
elkoren, and Bouchaud (2013). However, in order to investigate precisely this feature, we would
need more detailed market data keeping records of the identiers of the submitted and canceled
orders. As a result, execution probabilities might be slightly overestimated using Assumptions
3 and 4. Simulation results (for n0= 1) are shown in Figure 9, together with the predictions
associated to a Poisson model that assumes a linearly increasing cancellation rate. We see that
our three models give fairly similar execution probabilities, while the Poisson model clearly
overestimates them.
16

3 The queue-reactive model: a time consistent model
with stochastic LOB and dynamic reference price
We now wish to obtain a model which is relevant on the whole period of interest and provides
useful applications.
3.1 Model III: The queue-reactive model
3.1.1 Building the model
Letdenote the tick value. We assume here that prefchanges with some probability when
some event modies the midprice pmid. More precisely, when pmidincreases/decreases9,pref
increases/decreases by with probability , providedq1= 0 at that moment. Hence changes
ofprefare possibly triggered by one of the three following events:
The insertion of a buy limit order within the bid-ask spread while Q1is empty at the
moment of this insertion, or the insertion of a sell limit order within the bid-ask spread
whileQ 1is empty at the moment of this insertion.
A cancellation of the last limit order at one of the best oer queues.
A market order that consumes the last limit order at one of the best oer queues.
Whenprefchanges, the value of qiswitches immediately to the value of one of its neighbors (right
ifprefincreases, left if it decreases). Thus, q1becomes zero when prefdecreases/increases.
Recall that we keep records of the LOB up to the third limit. Consequently, the value for
q3whenprefincreases/decreases is drawn from its invariant measure. Note that the queue
switching process must be handled very carefully: the average event sizes are not the same for
dierent queues. So, when qibecomesqj, its new value should be re-normalized by the ratio
between the two average event sizes at QiandQj.
To possibly incorporate external information, we moreover assume that with probability reinit,
the LOB state is redrawn from its invariant distribution around the new reference price when
prefchanges. The parameter reinitcan be understood as the percentage of price changes
due to exogenous information. In this case, we consider that market participants readjust
very quickly their order ows around the new reference price, as if a new state of the LOB
was drawn from its invariant distribution. A similar approach has been used in Cont and
De Larrard (2013) in a model for best bid and best ask queues, in which reinitis set to 1.
Under these assumptions, the market dynamics is now modeled by a (2 K+ 1)-dimensional
Markov process: ~X(t) := (X(t);pref(t)), in the countable state space ~
 =N2KN, where
X(t) = (q K(t);:::;q 1(t);q1(t);:::;q K(t)) represents the available volumes at dierent limits.
In the sequel, Model I is used to describe the LOB dynamics during periods when prefis
constant (very similar results are obtained in simulations using Model IIaor IIb). Thepref
change probability and the LOB reinitialization probability reinitare calibrated using the 10
9Note that in this model, prefdoes not necessarily match its estimated value using the method introduced
in Section 2.2. However, for large tick assets, the dierence is negligible.
17

Figure 10: 10 min volatility and mean reversion ratio, France Telecom
minutes standard deviation of the returns of pmid(the volatility) and the mean reversion ratio
introduced in Robert and Rosenbaum (2011), dened by
=Nc
2Na;
whereNcis the number of continuations of the estimated prefon the interval of interest (that
is the number of consecutive moves in the same direction) and Nais the number of alternations
(that is the number of consecutive moves in opposite directions)10. Indeed, the microstructure
of large tick assets is well summarized by the parameter , see Robert and Rosenbaum (2011)
and Dayri and Rosenbaum (2012) and the volatility is of course one of the most important
low frequency statistics. In Figure 10, we show the surfaces of the 10 min volatility and for
dierent values of andreinit.
3.1.2 About the maximal mechanical volatility
Let us comment now the particular case where we take reinit= 0. In such situation, Model
III becomes a \purely order book driven model" since the price uctuations are completely
generated by the LOB dynamics. Our simulations show that under this setting, the maximal
attainable volatility level (when = 1), which we call maximal mechanical volatility, is much
lower than the empirical volatility (5 bps compared with 14 bps for the stock France Telecom).
This suggests that endogenous LOB dynamics alone may not be enough for reproducing the
market volatility. A closer look at these results shows that the model approximates actually
quite well the average frequency of price changes, and that the small value of the mechanical
volatility is mainly due to the strong mean reverting behavior of the price in this purely order
book driven model. This is because of the often reversed bid-ask imbalance immediately after
a change of pref. In Figure 10, we can see that the mean reversion ratio is equal to 0 :08 when
= 1;reinit= 0, which is much smaller than the empirical ratio 0 :39.
10Note that here we compute the mean reversion ratio of prefwhile the transaction price is usually considered.
18

3.2 Example of application: Order placement analysis
We now show how the queue-reactive model can be used in the context of optimal trading. In
the general framework of optimal execution, the trading horizon is split into small slices (typi-
cally 5-10 minutes) and an algorithm of execution determines the volume to be executed in each
slice. This problem, often called \order scheduling problem", has been widely studied in the lit-
erature, see Bertsimas, Lo, and Hummel (1999); Almgren and Chriss (2000); Bouchard, Dang,
and Lehalle (2011) for representative examples on this topic. In practice, another optimization
issue, the \order placement problem", arises naturally once the order scheduling problem has
been solved: how should the algorithm place orders to execute the target volume?
This second optimization problem can be seen as the microstructural version of the rst one.
However, it is much more dicult to solve. Indeed, the price dynamics can no longer be ap-
proximated by a Brownian motion at these (ultra) high frequency scales. Moreover, the queue
priority plays an important role as well as other microstructural features of the asset such as the
tick size, the state of the LOB and the trading speed. This in particular implies that execution
strategies based on limit or market orders can lead to very dierent outcomes. Some papers
investigate the consequences of using dierent types of order, see Harris and Hasbrouck (1996),
while others aim at nding the best position to place limit orders, see Laruelle, Lehalle, and
Pag es (2013). However, in practice, order placement tactics are usually more complex than
the ones considered in the academic literature. For example, traders can hide their trading
intentions by splitting furthermore the target volume within each slice. Also, they may start
passively, sending limit orders, and then switch to market orders when some market conditions
change or a stopping time criteria is met. Very few quantitative tools are available for the anal-
ysis of sophisticated tactics and one often needs to rely on so-called market replayers, in which
the number of simulations is limited by that of the available trading days in the historical data.
Moreover, the market impact, that is the average price drift due to our own trading between
the beginning of the execution and a later time, is often neglected. In contrast, our framework
is unlimited in number of simulations and is both relevant and easy to use in order to study
market impact proles and execution costs of complex placement tactics.
We writentotalfor the total quantity to execute and Mfor the number of slices. An order
scheduling strategy gives the target quantity to be executed in each slice, denoted by ni(ni0
andPM
i=1ni=ntotal). An order placement tactic can be seen as a predened procedure of
order management, ensuring the execution of the target quantity within the slice. Here, as
illustration examples, we present two simple tactics, denoted by T1andT2. In thei-th slice,
both tactics post a limit order of size niat the best oer queue at the beginning of the period,
and send a market order with all the remaining quantity to complete the execution of the target
volume at the end time of the slice. In between:
T1 (Fire and forget): Whenpmidchanges, cancel the limit order and send a market
order at the opposite side with all the remaining volume if any.
T2 (Pegging to the best): When the best oer price changes or our order is the only
remaining order at the best oer limit, cancel the order and repost all the remaining
volume at the newly revealed best oer queue.
Since an order placement tactic is often specically designed for a given order scheduling strat-
egy, comparisons between two tactics should take into account the associated scheduling strat-
19

egy, together with the target benchmark11. Other parameters can also have inuence when
comparing two tactics, such as the total quantity to execute ntotaland the number of slices M.
To simplify our analysis, we simulate a buy order of size ntotal= 60 AES 1, withM= 20 and
the duration of each slice is xed to 10 minutes (a total trading period of 3h20). We focus on
two benchmarks: the VWAP on the total period (volume weighted average transaction price)
and the arrival price S0(the midprice when the execution algorithm starts). Moreover, two
types of order scheduling strategies, denoted by S1andS2, are considered to partly reect the
diversity of optimal trading schemes:
S1:A linear scheduling ( ni=ntotal=M), used for the VWAP benchmark.
S2:An exponential scheduling ni=ntotal(e (i 1)=4 e i=4), used for the benchmark S0.
Finally, note that Assumptions 3 and 4 are in force for the order cancellation processes.
3.2.1 Tactic performance analysis
The performance of an execution algorithm is often measured by its slippage, dened (for a
buy order) by
Slippage =Pbenchmark Pexec
Pbenchmark:
To understand the eects of the order placement tactic on the execution's slippage, we dene
the theoretical scheduling slippage by:
Ptheo
exec =MX
i=1niVWAPi
Slippagetheo=Pbenchmark Ptheo
exec
Pbenchmark;
where VWAPidenotes the volume weighted average transaction price of the i th slice. Indeed,
VWAPiis often considered as a simple proxy for the execution price in the slice when one
focuses on the scheduling algorithm. Hence, Slippagetheoessentially measures the quality of the
scheduling strategy and neglects the randomness in execution prices due to the order place-
ment tactic. Note that here a market impact component is included in the computation of the
theoretical scheduling slippage. This is because the value of VWAPiin each slice is obviously
impacted by our execution.
We launched 2000 simulations for each couple of ( S1/S2 ,T1/T2 ). The intensity functions
estimated for the stock France Telecom are used in these simulations, as well as the two pa-
rameters= 0:7 andreinit= 0:85 calibrated in Section 3.1. Furthermore, we use a standard
kernel smoothing method when estimating the probability density functions of Slippagetheoand
Slippage. The results are shown in Figure 11.
11In execution services, the client often wants the execution algorithm to target some specic price (the
arrival price, the average market price during a predened period,...). The quality of the execution is then
assessed on the basis of the dierence between the realized execution price and this target benchmark price.
20

-6 -4 -2 024600.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 
Slippage (bp) Density Function Linear scheduling, VWAP 
  s1+t1,simulated slippage 
s1+t1,theoretical slippage 
s1+t2,simulated slippage 
s1+t2,theoretical slippage 
-80 -60 -40 -20 020 40 60 00.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025 0.03 
Slippage (bp) Density Function Exponential scheduling, Arrival Price 
  s2+t1,simulated slippage 
s2+t1,theoretical slippage 
s2+t2,simulated slippage 
s2+t2,theoretical slippage Figure 11: Simulation results for the tactics
Figure 11 suggests that the slippage distributions of the same scheduling strategy using two
dierent tactics can be very dierent: T2(\Pegging to the best") performs better than T1
(\Fire and forget") when being coupled with a linear scheduling strategy with VWAP bench-
mark, while T1slightly outperforms T2when an exponential scheduling strategy with arrival
price benchmark is considered. In our setting, the limit orders change the queue sizes and
therefore modify the behaviors of the order ows. Consequently they generate market impact.
By constantly following the best oer queue until the total volume is lled, T2achieves on
average a higher passive execution rate (dened as the volume passively executed12divided by
the total executed volume). Thus, in each slice, it often obtains a better price than that of a
more market orders based tactic. However, at the same time, it creates a larger impact than
T1since the order stays longer in the queues. This explains why the theoretical scheduling
slippage of T2is worse than that of T1for an execution with arrival price benchmark using
an exponential scheduling strategy.
3.2.2 Market impact proles
We now study the market impact proles of these two tactics. Recall that an order placement
tactic has two parameters: the slice duration Tand the quantity to execute n. In the follow-
ing experiments, Tis set to 10 minutes, and the value of nvaries from 1 to 60 AES 1. We
denote by MIi(t;n) the market impact at time tof Tacticiwith target quantity n, dened by:
MIi(t;n) = E[St S0
S0], withStthe midprice at time t. We launched 2000 simulations for each
value ofn;tin the ranges 1-60 AES 1and 1-600 seconds. Impact proles are given in Figure 12.
In agreement with the celebrated \square-root law", see Gatheral (2010); Toth, Lemperiere,
Deremble, De Lataillade, Kockelkoren, and Bouchaud (2011a); Farmer, Gerig, Lillo, and Wael-
broeck (2013), the market impact curves are concave both in time and volume. One can also
see that the impact of T1is quite instantaneous and depends essentially on the target quantity
n, while the impact of T2is a progressive process, depending both on the target quantity n
and the time t. Remark that T2seems suitable when dealing with small orders since its market
impact is small and it has a higher passive execution rate than T1. If one needs to trade larger
12A buy execution is said to be passive if it occurs at the bid side of the LOB, aggressive if it occurs at the
ask side of the LOB.
21

0100 200 300 400 500 600 0123456
Time (second) Impact (bp) Market impact profile Tactic 1 
  
n = 1 
n = 10 
n = 20 
n = 30 
n = 40 
n = 50 
n = 60 
0100 200 300 400 500 600 0510 15 20 25 
Time (second) Impact (bp) Market impact profile Tactic 2 
  
n = 1 
n = 10 
n = 20 
n = 30 
n = 40 
n = 50 
n = 60 Figure 12: Market impact proles
orders, T1becomes probably more relevant since the cost of market impact is likely to outweigh
the benet from passive execution of T2. Finally, note that in our Markovian framework, no
signicant price relaxation (that is the fact that on average, after the completion of the execu-
tion of a buy order, the price may drop to a lower level than the one reached at the end of the
execution) can be observed.
4 Conclusion and perspectives
In this work, we have modeled market participants intelligence through their average behaviors
towards various states of the LOB. This enabled us to analyze the dierent order ows and to
design a suitable market simulator for practitioners, allowing notably to investigate the trans-
action costs of complex trading strategies. To our knowledge, our model is the rst one where
such pre-trade cost analysis is possible in a simple and ecient way.
Another important public information, the historical order ow, is not considered in this ap-
proach. Market order ows have been shown to be autocorrelated in several empirical studies,
see for example Toth, Palit, Lillo, and Farmer (2011b). Thus, adding such feature in our frame-
work would probably be relevant. Another possible direction for future research would be to
explain the shape of the estimated intensity functions in a more sophisticated way. For example,
it would be interesting to design some agent based model where these repetitive patterns of the
LOB dynamics would be reproduced, providing an even better understanding of the nature of
these intensity curves.
22

5 Appendix
5.1 Proof of Theorem 2.1
Proof. For somez >1, set
V(q) =KX
j= K;j6=0zjqj Cboundj+:
For anyq2
, we have:
QV(q) =X
p6=qQq;p[V(p) V(q)]
=KX
i= K;i6=0[fi(q)(zjqi+1 Cboundj+ zjqi Cboundj+) +gi(q)(zjqi 1 Cboundj+ zjqi Cboundj+)]
=KX
i= K;i6=0[fi(q)1qiCboundzjqi Cboundj+(z 1) +gi(q)1qiCbound +1zjqi Cboundj+(1
z 1)]
= (z 1)KX
i= K;i6=0[fi(q)1qiCbound gi(q)1qiCbound +1
z]zjqi Cboundj+
= (z 1)X
i:qi=Cboundfi(q) + (z 1)X
i:qi>Cbound[fi(q) gi(q)
z]zqi Cbound: (1)
Under Assumption 1 and 2, we can nd a zsuciently close to 1 such that, if qi>C bound,
fi(q) gi(q)
z<z 1( r+H(z 1)) = r0<0:
So, from Equation (1), we have
QV(q)(z 1)H (z 1)X
i:qi>Cboundr0zqi Cbound
   (z 1)r0X
izjqi Cboundj++ (z 1)H+ 2(z 1)r0K
   (z 1)r0V(q) + (z 1)[H+ 2r0Kz]:
ThusX(t) is V-uniformly ergodic. Then using Theorem 4.2 in Meyn and Tweedie (1993), X(t)
is Harris positive recurrent and has a nite invariant measure. Furthermore, by Theorem 3.6.2
in Norris (1998), the process X(t) converges to its equilibrium and is therefore ergodic.
5.2 Computation of condence intervals
When the queues are independent, by the central limit theorem, we have, with asymptotic
probability 95% (we note ^ piL(n) =#fT(!)2E+;qi(!)=ng
#fqi(!)=ng):
i(n)2[^i(n) 1:96^i(n)p
#fqi(!) =ng;^i(n) +1:96^i(n)p
#fqi(!) =ng]
L
i(n)
i(n)2[ ^piL(n) 1:96q
^piL(n)(1 ^piL(n))
p
#fqi(!) =ng;^piL(n) +1:96q
^piL(n)(1 ^piL(n))
p
#fqi(!) =ng]:
23

So, at least with probability 90%:
L
i(n)2[(^i(n) 1:96^i(n)p
#fqi(!) =ng)( ^piL(n) 1:96q
^piL(n)(1 ^piL(n))
p
#fqi(!) =ng)
(^i(n) +1:96^i(n)p
#fqi(!) =ng)( ^piL(n) +1:96q
^piL(n)(1 ^piL(n))
p
#fqi(!) =ng)]:
Similar results can be computed for C
iandM
i. The method used to compute condence
intervals of Model IIais quite similar. Condence intervals are more dicult to compute in
Model IIb, and we use approximations by neglecting the possible intersections between the two
sets:fq1(!) =n;Sm;l(q 1(!))2s)gandfq 1(!) =n;Sm;l(q1(!))2s)g.
5.3 Quasi birth and death process
Denition 5.1. (Quasi birth and death process, from Latouche and Ramaswami (1999)): A
quasi birth and death (QBD) process is a bivariate Markov process with countable state space
S=f(i;j) :i0;j= 0;1;:::;mgwhere the rst element iis called the level of the process, and
the second element jis called the phase of the process. The parameter mcan be either nite or
innite. The process is restricted in level jumps only to its nearest neighbors, meaning that the
probability of jumping from level idirectly to level l;li+ 2orli 2is equal to zero.
We can easily see that the Markov process ( q1;q2) in Model IIais indeed a QBD process with
countable phases. Its innitesimal generator matrix is of the following form:
Q=2
6664A(0)
1A(0)
0 0 0:::
A(1)
2A(1)
1A(1)
0 0:::
0A(2)
2A(2)
1A(2)
0:::
::: ::: ::: ::: :::3
7775;
where the matrix A(`)
0encodes transitions from level q1=`to levelq1=`+ 1, matrix A(`)
2
encodes transitions from level q1=`to levelq1=` 1, and matrix A(`)
1encodes transitions
within level q1=`. More specically, the element ( i;j) ofA(`)
0is the transition rate from state
(q1=`;q2=i) to state (q1=`+ 1;q2=j), the element ( i;j) ofA(`)
2is the transition rate from
state (q1=`;q2=i) to state (q1=` 1;q2=j), and the element ( i;j) ofA(`)
1is the transition
rate from state ( q1=`;q2=i) to state (q1=`;q2=j).
We write the intensity functions at Q2whenq1= 0 with a ~ . For matrix A(`)
i,i= 0;1;2, we
have:
A(k)
0=L
1(k)I;
A(k)
2= (C
1(k) +M
buy(k))I;
A(0)
1=2
664 L
1(0) ~L
2(0) ~L
2(0) 0 :::
~C
2(1) + ~M
buy(1) L
1(0) ~L
2(1) ~C
2(1) ~M
buy(1) ~L
2(1) :::
0 ~C
2(2) + ~M
buy(2) L
1(0) ~L
2(2) ~C
2(2) ~M
buy(2):::
::: ::: ::: :::3
775;
24

and fork1:
A(k)
1=2
4 C
1(k) M
buy(k) L
1(k) L
2(0) L
2(0) 0 :::
C
2(1)  C
1(k) M
buy(k) L
1(k) L
2(1) C
2(1)L
2(1):::
::: ::: ::: :::3
5:
We denei;j=P[q1=i;q2=j] the stationary distribution of this QBD process, and:
n= [n;0;n;1;:::]
= [0;1;:::]:
We shall have:
Q = 0
1 = 1:
The dynamics of the two queues system ( q1;q2) is level dependent, meaning that its transi-
tion kernel depends on the value of q1. This makes the computation or approximation of its
asymptotic behavior quite dicult. Thus we consider an additional assumption in order to turn
(q1;q2) into a so-called level independent QBD process. This is particularly interesting since it
enables us to easily express the invariant measure in a matrix geometric form and to compute
it numerically. The level independence property is dened by the fact that for i1,A(i)
0,A(i)
1
andA(i)
2do not depend on iandA(0)
0=A(i)
0, see Latouche and Ramaswami (1999). Under the
following assumption, this property is satised by ( q1;q2) in Model IIa.
Assumption 5. (Independent Poisson ows at rst limits) There are two positive constants
1and1, with1< 1, such that for k1:
C
1(k) +M
buy(k) =1
L
1(k) =1
L
1(0) =1:
In practice, 1and1are taken as the average values of the estimated intensity functions
at rst limits. Under this assumption, a quite simple numerical computation of the invariant
distribution is possible. Generally speaking, QBD processes with nite phase (meaning that
the value set of the second dimension, in our case q2, is nite) can be easily treated, see for
example Latouche and Ramaswami (1999). In the innite case, truncation methods must be
applied to obtain approximate results. Thanks to the special structure of the generator in our
model, one simple truncation method, called \rst column augmentation by block", can be
applied. Details of this truncation method can be found in Bean and Latouche (2010). The
mathlab toolbox SMCSolver, see Bini, Meini, Ste e, and Van Houdt (2006), is used to compute
the invariant measure.
5.4 Alcatel-Lucent
Results for the stock Alcatel-Lucent are presented in the following gures (Figure 13 to Figure
18).
25

010 20 30 40 50 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 11.2 1.4 1.6 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Limit order insertion intensity, Model I 
  
First limit 
Second limit 
Third limit 
010 20 30 40 50 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Limit order cancellation intensity, Model I 
  
First limit 
Second limit 
Third limit 
010 20 30 40 50 00.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Market order arrival intensity, Model I 
  
First limit 
Second limit 
Third limit Figure 13: Intensities at Q1;2;3, Alcatel Lucent
010 20 30 40 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Second limit, limit order insertion 
  
010 20 30 40 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Second limit, limit order cancellation 
  
010 20 30 40 00.05 0.1 0.15 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) Second limit, market order insertion 
  
q1 == 0 
q1 > 0 q1 == 0 
q1 > 0 q1 == 0 
q1 > 0 
Figure 14: Intensities at Q2as functions of 1 q1>0andq2, Alcatel Lucent
010 20 30 40 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) First limit, limit order insertion 
  
q(-1) = 0 
0<q(-1)<=2 
2 < q(-1) <= 5 
q(-1) > 5 
010 20 30 40 00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) First limit, limit order cancellation 
  
q(-1) = 0 
0<q(-1)<=2 
2 < q(-1) <= 5 
q(-1) > 5 
010 20 30 40 00.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 
Queue Size (per average event size) Intensity (num per second) First limit, market order insertion 
  
q(-1) = 0 
0<q(-1)<=2 
2 < q(-1) <= 5 
q(-1) > 5 
Figure 15: Intensities at Q1as functions ofSm;l(q 1) andq1, Alcatel Lucent
26

010 20 30 40 50 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 First limit 
Queue size (in AES) Distribution 
  
010 20 30 40 50 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 Second limit 
Queue size (in AES) Distribution 
  
010 20 30 40 50 00.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 Third limit 
Queue size (in AES) Distribution 
  
Empirical estimation 
Model I 
Poisson ModelEmpirical estimation 
Model I 
Poisson ModelEmpirical estimation 
Model I 
Poisson ModelFigure 16: Queue distribution, Alcatel Lucent
Figure 17: Model IIa: joint distribution of q1;q2, Alcatel Lucent
Figure 18: Model IIb: joint distribution of q 1;q1, Alcatel Lucent
27

5.5 AES
AES iis dened as the average size of all events (including limit order insertion, cancellation
and trades) at Qi, while ATS computes only the average size of all trade events. In Table 5.5
we show the estimated values of AES at dierent distances to prefand the estimated value of
ATS, for the stocks France Telecom and Alcatel-Lucent.
stock ATS AES 1AES 2AES 3
France Telecom 637 836 1068 1069
Alcatel Lucent 2340 3033 3451 3528
Table 2: AES and ATS (in number of stocks)
References
Abergel, F. and Jedidi, A. (2011), \A mathematical approach to order book modelling," in
Econophysics of Order-driven Markets , Springer, pp. 93{107.
Almgren, R. and Chriss, N. (2000), \Optimal execution of portfolio transactions," Journal of
Risk, 3, 5{39.
Avellaneda, M. and Stoikov, S. (2008), \High-frequency trading in a limit order book," Quan-
titative Finance , 8, 217{224.
Bean, N. and Latouche, G. (2010), \Approximations to quasi-birth-and-death processes with
innite blocks," Advances in Applied Probability , 42, 1102{1125.
Bertsimas, D., Lo, A. W., and Hummel, P. (1999), \Optimal control of execution costs for
portfolios," Computing in Science and Engg. , 1, 40{53.
Bini, D., Meini, B., Ste e, S., and Van Houdt, B. (2006), \Structured Markov chains solver:
algorithms," in Proceeding from the 2006 workshop on Tools for solving structured Markov
chains , ACM, p. 13.
Bouchard, B., Dang, N.-M., and Lehalle, C.-A. (2011), \Optimal control of trading algorithms:
a general impulse control approach," SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 2, 404{438.
Cont, R. and De Larrard, A. (2013), \Price dynamics in a Markovian limit order market,"
SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 4, 1{25.
Cont, R., Stoikov, S., and Talreja, R. (2010), \A stochastic model for order book dynamics,"
Operations research , 58, 549{563.
Dayri, K. and Rosenbaum, M. (2012), \Large tick assets: implicit spread and optimal tick size,"
Preprint arXiv:1207.6325 .
Delattre, S., Robert, C. Y., and Rosenbaum, M. (2013), \Estimating the ecient price from the
order ow: a Brownian Cox process approach," Stochastic Processes and their Applications ,
123, 2603{2619.
28

Farmer, J. D., Gerig, A., Lillo, F., and Waelbroeck, H. (2013), \How eciency shapes market
impact," Quantitative Finance , 13, 1743{1758.
Gareche, A., Disdier, G., Kockelkoren, J., and Bouchaud, J.-P. (2013), \A Fokker-Planck de-
scription for the queue dynamics of large tick stocks," Preprint arXiv:1304.6819 .
Gatheral, J. (2010), \No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact," Quantitative Finance , 10,
749{759.
Gross, D. and Harris, C. M. (1998), Fundamentals of queuing theory , Wiley New York.
Harris, L. and Hasbrouck, J. (1996), \Market vs. limit orders: the SuperDOT evidence on order
submission strategy," Journal of Financial and Quantitative analysis , 31, 213{231.
Laruelle, S., Lehalle, C.-A., and Pag es, G. (2013), \Optimal posting price of limit orders:
learning by trading," Mathematics and Financial Economics , 7, 359{403.
Latouche, G. and Ramaswami, V. (1999), Introduction to matrix analytic methods in stochastic
modeling , vol. 5, ASA-SIAM.
Madhavan, A., Richardson, M., and Roomans, M. (1997), \Why do security prices change? A
transaction-level analysis of NYSE stocks," Review of Financial Studies , 10, 1035{1064.
Meyn, S. P. and Tweedie, R. L. (1993), \Stability of Markovian processes III: Foster-Lyapunov
criteria for continuous-time processes," Advances in Probability , 518{548.
Norris, J. R. (1998), Markov chains , no. 2008, Cambridge University Press.
Robert, C. Y. and Rosenbaum, M. (2011), \A new approach for the dynamics of ultra-high-
frequency data: the model with uncertainty zones," Journal of Financial Econometrics , 9,
344{366.
Smith, E., Farmer, D. J., Gillemot, L., and Krishnamurthy, S. (2003), \Statistical theory of the
continuous double auction," Quantitative Finance , 3, 481{514.
Toth, B., Lemperiere, Y., Deremble, C., De Lataillade, J., Kockelkoren, J., and Bouchaud, J.-P.
(2011a), \Anomalous price impact and the critical nature of liquidity in nancial markets,"
Physical Review X , 1, 021006.
Toth, B., Palit, I., Lillo, F., and Farmer, J. D. (2011b), \Why is order ow so persistent?"
arXiv preprint arXiv:1108.1632 .
Wyart, M., Bouchaud, J.-P., Kockelkoren, J., Potters, M., and Vettorazzo, M. (2008), \Rela-
tion between bid{ask spread, impact and volatility in order-driven markets," Quantitative
Finance , 8, 41{57.
29

