arXiv:1810.09965v1  [cs.LG]  23 Oct 2018Using Deep Learning for price prediction by exploiting stat ionary
limit order book features
Avraam Tsantekidisa, Nikolaos Passalisa, Anastasios Tefasa, Juho Kanniainenb, Moncef
Gabboujc, Alexandros Iosiﬁdisd
aDepartment of Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessa loniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
bLaboratory of Industrial and Information Management, Tamp ere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland
cLaboratory of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Tec hnology, Tampere, Finland
dDepartment of Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engine ering, Aarhus University, Denmark
Abstract
The recent surge in Deep Learning (DL) research of the past deca de has successfully provided
solutions to many diﬃcult problems. The ﬁeld of quantitative analysis h as been slowly adapting
the new methods to its problems, but due to problems such as the no n-stationarynature of ﬁnancial
data, signiﬁcant challenges must be overcomebefore DL is fully utilize d. In this work a new method
to construct stationary features, that allows DL models to be app lied eﬀectively, is proposed. These
features are thoroughly tested on the task of predicting mid price movements of the Limit Order
Book. Several DL models are evaluated, such as recurrent Long S hort Term Memory (LSTM)
networks and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Finally a nove l model that combines the
ability of CNNs to extract useful features and the ability of LSTMs’ to analyze time series, is
proposed and evaluated. The combined model is able to outperform the individual LSTM and
CNN models in the prediction horizons that are tested.
Keywords: Limit Order Book, Stationary Features, Price Forecasting, Deep L earning
1. Introduction
In the last decade Machine Learning (ML) has been rapidly evolving du e to the profound
performanceimprovementsthat Deep Learning(DL) has ushered . Deep Learninghas outperformed
previous state-of-the-art methods in many ﬁelds of Machine Lear ning, such as Natural Language
Processing(NLP)[1], imageprocessing[2]andspeechgeneration[3]. Asthenumberofnewmethods
incorporating Deep Learning in many scientiﬁc ﬁelds increase, the pr oposed solutions begin to span
across other disciplines where Machine Learning was used in a limited ca pacity. One such example
is the quantitative analysis of the stock markets and the usage of M achine Learning to predict price
movements or the volatility of the future prices or the detection of anomalous events in the markets.
In the ﬁeld of quantitative analysis, the mathematical modelling of th e markets has been the
de facto approach to model stock price dynamics for trading, mar ket making, hedging, and risk
Email addresses: avraamt@csd.auth.gr (Avraam Tsantekidis), passalis@csd.auth.gr (Nikolaos Passalis),
tefas@aiia.csd.auth.gr (Anastasios Tefas), juho.kanniainen@tut.fi (Juho Kanniainen), moncef.gabbouj@tut.fi
(Moncef Gabbouj), alexandros.iosifidis@eng.au.dk (Alexandros Iosiﬁdis)

management. By utilizing a time series of values, such as the price ﬂuc tuations of ﬁnancial products
being traded in the markets, one can construct statistical models which can assist in the extraction
of useful information about the current state of the market and a set of probabilities for possible
future states, such as price or volatility changes. Many models, su ch as the Black-Scholes-Merton
model [4], attempted to mathematically deduce the price of options a nd can be used to provide
useful indications of future price movements.
However,at some point asmore marketparticipantsstarted using the same model the behaviour
of the price changed to the point that it could no longer be taken adv antage of. Newer models,
such as the stochastic modelling of limit order book dynamics [5], the j ump-diﬀusion processes for
stock dynamics [6] and volatility estimation of market microstructur e noise [7] have been attempts
predict multiple aspects of the ﬁnancial markets. Howeversuch mo dels aredesigned to be tractable,
even at the cost of reliability and accuracy, and thus they do not ne cessarily ﬁt empirical data very
well.
The aforementioned properties put handcrafted models at a disad vantage, since the ﬁnancial
markets very frequently exhibit irrational behaviour, mainly due to the large inﬂuence of human
activity, which frequently causes these models to fail. Combining Mac hine Learning models with
handcrafted features usually improves the forecasting abilities of such models, by overcoming some
ofthe aforementionedlimitations, and improvingpredictions about v ariousaspects ofﬁnancial mar-
kets. This led many organizations that participate in the Financial Ma rkets, such as Hedge Funds
and investment ﬁrms, to increasingly use ML models, along with the co nventional mathematical
models, to make crucial decisions.
Furthermore, the introduction of electronic trading, that also led to the automation of trading
operations, has magniﬁed the volume of exchanges, producing a we alth of data. Deep Learning
models are perfect candidates for analyzing such amounts of data , since they perform signiﬁcantly
better than the conventional Machine Learning methodologies whe n a large amount of data is
available. This is one of the reasons that Deep Learning is starting to have a role in analyzing the
data coming from ﬁnancial exchanges. [8, 9]
The most detailed type of data that ﬁnancial exchanges are gathe ring is the comprehensive logs
of every submitted order and event that is happening within their int ernal matching engine. This
log can be used to reconstruct the Limit Order Book (LOB), which is e xplained further in Section 3.
A basic task that can arise from this data is the prediction of future price movements of an asset by
examining the current and past supply and demand of Limit Orders. T his type of comprehensive
logs kept by the exchanges is excessively large and traditional Mach ine Learning techniques, such
as Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [10], usually cannot be applied ou t-of-the-box. Utilizing this
kind of data directly with existing Deep Learning methods is also not po ssible due to their non-
stationary nature. Prices ﬂuctuate and suﬀer from stochastic d rift, so in order for them to be
eﬀectively utilized by DL methods a preprocessing step is required to generate stationary features
from them.
The main contribution of this work is the proposal of a set of station ary features that can be
readily extracted from the Limit Order Book. The proposed featur es are thoroughly evaluated
for predicting future mid price movements from large-scale high-fr equency Limit Order data using
several diﬀerent Deep Learning models, ranging from simple Multilaye r Perceptrons (MLPs) and
CNNs to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). Also we propose a no vel Deep Learning model that
combines the feature extraction ability of Convolutional Neural Ne tworks (CNNs) with the Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks’ power to analyze time series .
In Section 2 related work which employs ML models on ﬁnancial data is b rieﬂy presented.
2

Then, the dataset used is described in detail in Section 3. In Section 4 the proposed stationary
featureextractionmethodologyispresentedin detail, whilein Sectio n5the proposedDeepLearning
methods are described. In Section 6 the experimental evaluation a nd comparisons are provided.
Finally, conclusions are drawn and future work is discussed in Section 7.
2. Related Work
The task of regressing the future movements of ﬁnancial assets has been the subject of many
recent works such as [11, 12, 13]. Proven models such as GARCH are improved and augmented
with machine learning component such as Artiﬁcial Neural Networks [14]. New hybrid models are
employed along with Neural Networks to improve upon previous perf ormance [15].
One of the most volatile ﬁnancial markets is FOREX, the currency ma rkets. In [16], neural
networks are used to predict the future exchange rate of major FOREX pairs such as USD/EUR.
The model is tested with diﬀerent prediction steps ranging from daily to yearly which reaches the
conclusion that shorter term predictions tend to be more accurat e. Other ﬁnancial metrics, such
as cash ﬂow prediction, are very closely correlated to price predict ion.
In [17], the authors propose the “Deep Portfolio Theory” which app lies autoencoders in order
to produce optimal portfolios. This approach outperforms sever al established benchmarks, such as
the Biotechnology IBB Index. Likewise in [18], another type of auto encoders, known as Restricted
Boltzmann Machine (RBM), is applied to encode the end-of-month pr ices of stocks. Then, the
model is ﬁne-tuned to predict whether the price will move more than the median change and the
direction of such movement. This strategy is able to outperform a b enchmark momentum strategy
in terms of annualized returns.
Another approach is to include data sources outside the ﬁnancial t ime series, e.g., [19], where
phrases related to ﬁnance, such as “mortgage” and “bankruptc y” were monitored on the Google
trendsplatformandincludedasaninputtoarecurrentneuralnet workalongwiththedailyS&P500
market fund prices. The trainingtarget is the prediction ofthe fut ure volatility ofthe marketfund’s
price. This approach can greatly outperform many benchmark met hods, such as the autoregressive
GARCH and Lasso techniques.
The surge of DL methods has dramatically improved the performanc e over many conventional
machine learning methods on tasks, such as speech recognition [20], image captioning[21, 22], and
question answering [23]. The most important building blocks of DL are t he Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) [24], and the Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) . Also worth mentioning is the
improvement of RNNs with the introduction of Long Short-Term Mem ory Units (LSTMs) [25],
which has made the analysis of time series using DL easier and more per formant.
Unfortunately DL methods are prone to overﬁt especially in tasks s uch as price regression and
many works exist trying to prevent such overﬁtting [26, 27]. Some might attribute overﬁtting
to the lack of huge amounts of data that other tasks such as image and speech processing have
available to them. A very rich data source for ﬁnancial forecasting is the Limit Order Book.
One of the few applications of ML in high frequency Limit Order Book da ta is [8], where several
handcrafted features are created, including price deltas, bid-as k spreads and price and volume
derivatives. An SVM is then trained to predict the direction of futur e mid price movements using
all the handcrafted features. In [28] a neural network architec ture incorporating the idea of bilinear
projection augmented with a temporal attention mechanism is used to predict LOB mid price.
Similarlyin[29,30]utilizetheLimitOrderBookdataalongwithMLmethods suchasmultilinear
methodsandsmartfeatureselectiontopredictthefuturepricem ovements. Inourpreviouswork[31,
3

9, 32] we introduced a large-scale high-frequency Limit Order Book dataset, that is also used in
this paper, and we employed three simple DL models, the Convolutiona l Neural Networks (CNN),
the Long-Short Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM RNNs) and the Neural Bag-of-
Features (N-BoF) model, to tackle the problem of forecasting the mid price movements. However,
these approachesdirectly used the non-stationaryraw OrderBo ok data, making them vulnerable to
distribution shifts and harming their ability to generalize on unseen da ta, as we also experimentally
demonstrate in this paper.
To the best of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst work that proposes a s tructured approach for
extracting stationary price features from the Limit Order Book th at can be eﬀectively combined
with Deep Learning models. We also provide an extensive evaluation of the proposed methods on
a large-scale dataset with more than 4 million events. Also, a powerfu l model, that combines the
CNN feature extraction properties with the LSTM’s time series mode lling capabilities, is proposed
inordertoimprovetheaccuracyofpredictingthepricemovemento fstocks. Theproposedcombined
model is also compared with the previously introduced methods using the proposed stationaryprice
features.
3. Limit Order Book Data
In an order-driven ﬁnancial market, a market participant can plac e two types of buy/sell orders.
By posting a limit order , a trader promises to buy (sell) a certain amount of an asset at a sp eciﬁed
price or less (more). The limit order book compromises on the valid limit o rder that are not
executed or cancelled yet.
This Limit OrderBook(LOB) containsall existing buy and sell orderst hat havebeen submitted
and are awaiting to be executed. A limit order is placed on the queue at a given price level, where,
in the case of standard limit orders, the execution priority at a given price level is dictated by the
arrival time (ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out). A market order is is an order to immediately buy/sell a certain
quantity of the asset at the best available price in the limit order book . If the requested price of a
limit order is far from the best prices, it may take a long time for the ex ecution of the limit order,
in which case, the order can ﬁnally be cancelled by the trader. The or ders are split between two
sides, the bid (buy) and the ask (sell) side. Each side contains the or ders sorted by their price, in
descending order for the bid side and ascending order for the ask s ide.
Following the notation used in [5], a price grid is deﬁned as {ρ(1)(t),...,ρ(n)(t)}, whereρ(j)(t)>
ρ(i)(t) for all j > i. The price grid contains all possible prices and each consecutive pric e level
is incremented by a single tick from the previous price level. The state of the order book is a
continuous-time process v(t)≡/parenleftbig
v(1)(t),v(2)(t),...,v(n)(t)/parenrightbig
t≥0, where |v(i)(t)|is the number of
outstanding limit orders at price ρ(i)(t), 1≤i≤n. Ifv(i)(t)<0, then there are −v(i)(t) bid orders
at priceρ(i)(t); ifv(i)(t)>0, then there are v(i)(t) ask orders at price ρ(i)(t). That is, v(i)(t)>0
refers to ask orders and v(i)(t)<0 bid orders.
The location of the best ask price in the price grid is deﬁned by:
i(1)
a(t) = inf{i= 1,...,n;v(i)(t)>0},
and, correspondingly, the location of the best bid price is deﬁned by :
i(1)
b(t) = sup{i= 1,...,n;v(i)(t)<0}.
4

For simplicity, we denote the best ask and bid prices as p(1)
a(t)≡ρ(i(1)
a(t))(t) andp(1)
b(t)≡
ρ/parenleftBig
i(1)
b(t)/parenrightBig
(t), respectively. Notice that if there are no ask (bid) orders in the b ook, the ask (bid)
price is not deﬁned.
More generally, given that the kth best ask and bid prices exist, their locations are denoted as
i(k)
a(t)≡ia(t)+k−1 andi(k)
b(t)≡ib(t)+k−1. Thekth best ask and bid prices are correspondingly
denotedby p(k)
a(t)≡ρ(i(k)
a(t))(t) andp(k)
b(t)≡ρ/parenleftBig
i(k)
b(t)/parenrightBig
(t), respectively. Correspondingly,wedenote
the number of outstanding limit orders at the kth best ask and bid levels by ν(k)
a(t)≡v(i(k)
a(t))(t)
andν(k)
b(t)≡v/parenleftBig
i(k)
b(t)/parenrightBig
(t), respectively.
Limit Order Book data can be used for a variety of tasks, such as th e estimation of the future
price trend or the regression of useful metrics, like the price volat ility. Other possible tasks may
include the early prediction of anomalous events, like extreme chang es in price which may indicate
manipulation in the markets. These examples are a few of multiple applic ations which can aid
investors to protect their capital when unfavourable conditions e xist in the markets or, in other
cases, take advantage of them to proﬁt.
Most modern methods that utilize ﬁnancial time series data employ su bsampling techniques,
such as the well-known OHLC (Open-High-Low-Close) candles [33], in o rder to reduce the number
of features of each time interval. Although the OHLC candles prese rve useful information, such as
the market trend and movement ranges within the speciﬁed interva ls, it removes possibly impor-
tant microstructure information. Since the LOB is constantly rece iving new orders in inconsistent
intervals, it is not possible to subsample time-interval features fro m it in a way that preserves all
the information it contains. This problem can be addressed, to some extent, using recurrent neural
network architectures, such as LSTMs, that are capable of nativ ely handling inputs of varying size.
This allows to directly utilize the data fully without using a time interval-b ased subsampling.
The LOB data used in this work is provided by Nasdaq Nordic and consis ts of 10 days worth of
LOB events for 5 diﬀerent Finnish company stocks, namely Kesko Oy j, Outokumpu Oyj, Sampo,
Rautaruukki and Wartsila Oyj [34, 35]. The exact time period of the g athered data begins from the
1st of June 2010 to the 14th of June 2010. Also, note that trading only happens during business
days.
The data consists of consecutive snapshots of the LOB state aft er each state altering event takes
place. This event might be an order insertion, execution or cancellat ion and after it interacts with
the LOB and change its state a snapshot of the new state is taken. The LOB depth of the data
that are used is 10 for each side of Order Book, which ends up being 1 0 active orders (consisting of
price and volume) for each side adding up to a total of 40 values for e ach LOB snapshot. This ends
up summing to a total of 4 .5 million snapshots that can be used to train and evaluate the propos ed
models.
In this workthe task we aim to accomplishis the prediction ofprice mov ementsbased on current
and past changes occurring in the LOB. This problem is formally deﬁne d as follows: Let x(t)∈Rq
denotethefeaturevectorthatdescribestheconditionoftheLO Battime tforaspeciﬁc stock, where
qis the dimensionality of the corresponding feature vector. The dire ction of the mid-price of that
stock is deﬁned as lk(t) ={−1,0,1}depending on whether the mid price decreased (-1), remained
stationary (0) or increased (1) after kLOB events occurred. The number of orders kis also called
prediction horizon . We aim to learn a model fk(x(t)), where fk:Rn→ {−1,0,1}, that predicts the
direction lk(t) of the mid-price after korders. In the following Section the aforementioned features
and labels, as well as the procedure to calculate them are explained in depth.
5

4. Stationary Feature and Label Extraction
The raw LOB data cannot be directly used for any ML task without so me kind of preprocessing.
The order volume values can be gathered for all stocks’ LOBs and n ormalized together, since they
are expected to follow the same distribution. However, this is not tr ue for price values, since the
value of a stock or asset may ﬂuctuate and increase with time to nev er before seen levels. This
means that the statistics of the price values can change signiﬁcant ly with time, rendering the price
time series non-stationary.
Simply normalizing all the price values will not resolve the non-stationa rity, since there will
always be unseen data that may change the distribution of values to ranges that are not present
in the current data. We present two solutions for this problem, one used in past work where
normalization is applied constantly using past available statistics and a new approachto completely
convert the price data to stationary values.
4.1. Input Normalization
The most common normalization scheme is standardization (z-score ):
xnorm=x−¯x
σ¯x, (1)
wherexis a feature to be normalized, ¯ xis the mean and σ¯xis the standard deviation across all
samples. Such normalization is separately applied to the order size va lues and the price values.
Using this kind of “global” normalization allows the preservation of the diﬀerent scales between
prices of diﬀerent stocks, which we are trying to avoid. The solution presented in [31, 9] is to use z-
score to normalize each stock-day worth of data with the means an d standard deviations calculated
using previous day’s data of the same stock. This way a major proble m is avoided which is the
distribution shift in stock prices, that can be caused by events suc h as stock splits or the large shifts
in price that can happen over longer periods of time.
Unfortunately this presents another important issue for learning . The diﬀerence between the
price values in diﬀerent LOB levels are almost always minuscule. Since all the price levels are
normalized using z-score with the same statistics, extracting feat ures at that scale is hard. In this
work we propose a novel approach to remedy this problem. Instea d of normalizing the raw values
of the LOB depth, we modify the price values to be their percentage diﬀerence to the current
mid price of the Order Book. This removes the non-stationarity fro m the price values, makes the
feature extraction process easier and signiﬁcantly improves the p erformance of ML models, as it is
also experimentally demonstrated in Section 6. To compensate for t he removal of the price value
itself we add an extra value to each LOB depth sample which is the perc entage change of the mid
price since the previous event.
The mid-price is deﬁned as the mid-point between the best bid and the best ask prices at time
tby
p(1)
m(t) =p(1)
a(t)+p(1)
b(t)
2. (2)
Let
p′(i)
a(t) =p(i)
a(t)
pm(t)−1, (3)
p′(i)
b(t) =p(i)
b(t)
pm(t)−1, (4)
6

and
p′
m(t) =pm(t)
pm(t−1)−1. (5)
Equations (3) and (4) serve as statistic features that represen t the proportional diﬀerence between
ith price and the mid-price at time t. Equation (2), on the other hand, serves as a dynamic feature
that captures the proportional mid-price movement over the time period (that is, it represents
asset’s return in terms of mid-prices).
We also use the cumulative sum of the sizes of the price levels as a feat ure, also know as Total
Depth:
ν′(k)
a(t) =k/summationdisplay
i=1ν(i)
a(t) (6)
ν′(k)
b(t) =k/summationdisplay
i=1ν(i)
b(t) (7)
whereν(i)
a(t) is number of outstanding limit order at the ith best ask price level and ν(i)
b(t) is
number of outstanding limit order at the bth best ask price level.
The proposed stationary features are brieﬂy summarized in Table 1 . After constructing these
three types of stationary features, each of them is separately n ormalized using standardization (z-
score), as described in (1), and concatenated into a single featur e vector xt, wheretdenotes the
time step.
The input used for the time-aware models, such as the CNN, LSTM an d CNN-LSTM, is the
sequence of vectors X={x0,x1,...,xw}, wherewis the number of total number of events each
one represented by a diﬀerent time step input. For the models that need all the input into a single
vector, such as the SVM and MLP models, the matrix Xis ﬂatten into a single dimension so it can
be used as input for these models.
4.2. Labels
The proposed models aim to predict the future movements of the mid price. Therefore, the
ground truth labels must be appropriately generated to reﬂect th e future mid price movements.
Note that themid priceisa“virtual”value andno ordercanbe guaran teedtoimmediately executed
if placed at that exact price. However being able to predict its upwar ds or downwards movement
provides a good estimate of the price of the future orders. A set o f discrete choices must be
constructed from our data to use as target for our classiﬁcation models. The labels for describing
the movement denoted by yt∈ {−1,0,1}, wheretdenotes the timestep.
Simply using pm(t+k)> pm(t) to determine the upward direction of the mid price would
introduce unmanageable amount of noise, since the smallest change would be registered as an
upward or downward movement. To remedy this, in our previous wor k [31, 9] the noisy changes of
the mid price were ﬁltered by employing two averaging ﬁlters. One ave raging ﬁlter was used on a
window of size kof the past values of the mid price and another averaging was applied on a future
7

Table 1: Brief description of each proposed stationary feat ure
Feature Description
Price level diﬀerenceThe diﬀerence of each price level to the current mid price, see Eq.
(3),(4)
p′(i)(t) =p(i)(t)
pm(t)−1
Mid price changeThe change of the current mid price to the mid price of the
previous time step, see Eq. (5)
p′
m(t) =pm(t)
pm(t−1)−1
Depth size cumsumTotal depth at each price level, see Eq. (6), (7)
ν′(k)(t) =k/summationdisplay
i=1ν(i)(t)
windowk:
mb(t) =1
k+1k/summationdisplay
i=0pm(t−i) (8)
ma(t) =1
kk/summationdisplay
i=1pm(t+i) (9)
whereptis the mid price as described in Equation (2). The label lt, that expresses the direction
of price movement at time t, is extracted by comparing the previously deﬁned quantities ( mband
ma). However, using the mbvalues to create labels for the samples, as in [31, 9], is making the
problem signiﬁcantly easier and predictable due to the slower adapta tion of the mean ﬁlter values
to sudden changes in price. Therefore, in this work we remedy this is sue by replacing mbwith the
mid price. Therefore, the labels are redeﬁned as:
lt=

1,ifma(t)
pm(t)>1+α
−1,ifma(t)
pm(t)<1−α
0,otherwise(10)
whereαis the threshold that determines how signiﬁcant a mid price change ma(t) must be in
order to label the movement as upward or downward. Values that d o not satisfy this inequality are
considered as insigniﬁcant and are labeled as having no price movemen t, or in other words being
“stationary”. The resulting labels present the trend to be predict ed. This process is applied across
all time steps of the dataset to produce labels for all the depth sam ples.
8

Input (300 time steps x 42 features) 
1D Convolution (10,40) 
16 ﬁlters 
1D Convolution (10,) 
16 ﬁlters 
1D Convolution (8,) 
32 ﬁlters 
1D Convolution (6,) 
32 ﬁlters 
MLP MLP MLP Temporal order of CNN extracted features 
1D Convolution (8,) 
32 ﬁlters 
Figure 1: A visual representation of the evaluated CNN model . Each layer includes the ﬁlter input size and the
number of ﬁlters used.
5. Machine Learning Models
In this section we explain the particular inner workings of the CNN and LSTM models that are
used and present how they are combined to form the proposed CNN -LSTM model. The technical
details of each model are explained along with the employed optimizatio n procedure.
5.1. Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) consist of the sequential application of convolutional
and pooling layers usually followed by some fully connected layers, as s hown in Figure 1. Each
convolutional layer iis equipped with a set of ﬁlters Wi∈RS×D×Nthat is convolved with an
input tensor, where Sis the number of used ﬁlters, Dis the ﬁlter size, and Nis the number of the
input channels. The input tensor X∈R(B×T×F)is consisted by the temporally ordered features
described in Section 4.1, where Bis the batch size, Tis the number of time steps and Fis the
number of features per time step.
In this work we leverage the causal padding introduced in [3] to avoid using future information
to produce features for the current time step. Using a series of c onvolutional layers allows for
capturing the ﬁne temporal dynamics of the time series as well as co rrelating temporally distant
features. After the last convolutional/pooling layer a set of fully co nnected layers are used to
classify the input time series. The network’s output expresses the categorical distribution for the
three direction labels (upward, downward and stationary), as des cribed in (10), for each time-step.
9

Wealsoemployatemporalbatchingtechnique, similarto the oneused in LSTMs, to increasethe
computational eﬃciency and reduce memory requirements of our e xperiments when training with
CNNs. Given the above described input tensor Xand convolution ﬁlters Withe last convolution
produces a tensor with dimensions ( B,T,S,N ), which in most uses cases is ﬂattened to a tensor
of size (B,T×S×N) before being fed to a fully connected layer. Instead we retain the temporal
ordering by only reducing the tensor to dimension ( B,T,S×N). An identical fully connected
network with a softmax output is applied for each S×Nvectors leading to Tdiﬀerent predictions.
Since we are using causal convolutions with ”full” padding, all the con volutional layers produce
the same time steps T, hence we do not need to worry about label alignment to the correc t time
step. Also the causal convolutions ensure that no information fro m the future leaks to past time
step ﬁlters. This technique reduces the receptive ﬁeld of the emplo yed CNN, but this can be easily
remedied by using a greater number of convolutional layers and/or a larger ﬁlter size D.
5.2. Long Short Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks
One of the most appropriate Neural Network architectures to ap ply on time series is the Re-
current Neural Network (RNN) architecture. Although powerfu l in theory, this type of network
suﬀers from the vanishing gradient problem, which makes the gradie nt propagation through a large
number of steps impossible. An architecture that was introduced t o solve this problem is the Long
Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks [25]. This architecture prot ects its hidden activation from
the decay of unrelated inputs and gradients by using gated functio ns between its “transaction”
points. The protected hidden activation is the “cell state” which is r egulated by said gates in the
following manner:
ft=σ(Wxf·x+Whf·ht−1+bf) (11)
it=σ(Wxi·x+Whi·ht−1+bi) (12)
c′
t=tanh(Whc·ht−1+Wxc·xt+bc) (13)
ct=ft·ct−1+it·c′
t (14)
ot=σ(Woc·ct+Woh·ht−1+bo) (15)
ht=ot·σ(ct) (16)
whereft,itandotare the activations of the input, forget and output gates at time- stept, which
control how much of the input and the previous state will be conside red and how much of the cell
state will be included in the hidden activation of the network. The pro tected cell activation at
time-step tis denoted by ct, whereas htis the activation that will be given to other components
of the model. The matrices Wxf,Whf,Wxi,Whi,Whc,Wxc,Woc,Wohare used to denote the
weights connecting each of the activations with the current time st ep inputs and the previous time
step activations.
5.3. Combination of models (CNN-LSTM)
We also introduce a powerful combination of the two previously desc ribed models. The CNN
model is identically applied as described in Section 5.1, using causal con volutions and temporal
batching to produce a set of features for each time step. In esse nce the CNN acts as the feature
extractor of the LOB depth time series, which produces a new time s eries of features with the same
length as the original one, with each of them having time steps corre sponding to one another.
10

An LSTM layer is then applied on the time series produced by the CNN, a nd in turn produces
a label for each time step. This works in a very similar way to the fully co nnected layer described
in 5.1 for temporal batching, but instead of the Fully Connected laye r the LSTM allows the model
to incorporate the features from past steps. The model archite cture is visualized in Figure 2.
5.4. Optimization
The parameters of the models are learned by minimizing the categoric al cross entropy loss
deﬁned as:
L(W) =−L/summationdisplay
i=1yi·logˆyi, (17)
whereLis the number of diﬀerent labels and the notation Wis used to refer to the parameters of
the models. The ground truth vector is denoted by y, whileˆyis the predicted label distribution.
The loss is summed over all samples in each batch. Due to the unavoida ble class imbalance of this
type of dataset, a weighted loss is employed to improve the mean rec all and precision across all
classes:
L(W) =−L/summationdisplay
i=1cyi·yi·logˆyi, (18)
wherecyiis the assigned weight for the class of yi. The individual weight ciassigned to each class
iis calculated as:
ci=|D|
n·|Di|, (19)
where|D|is the total number of samples in our dataset D,nis the total number of classes (which
in our case is 3) and Diis set of samples from our dataset that have been labeled to belong in class
i.
The most commonly used method to minimize the loss function deﬁned in (18) and learn the
parameters Wof the model is gradient descent [36]:
W′=W−η·∂L
∂W(20)
whereW′are the parameters of the model after each gradient descent st ep andηis the learning
rate. In this workwe utilize the RMSPropoptimizer [37], which is an ada ptive learning rate method
and has been shown to improve the training time and performance of DL models.
The LSTM, CNN and CNN-LSTM models alongwith all the training algorith mswere developed
using Keras [38], which is a framework built on top of the Tensorﬂow libr ary [39].
6. Experimental Evaluation
All the models were tested for step sizes k= 10,50,100,and 200 in (9), where the αvalue for
each was set at 2 ×10−5,9×10−5,3×10−4and 3.5×10−4respectively. The parameter αwas
chosen in conjunction with the future horizon with the aim to have re latively balanced distribution
of labels across classes. In a real trading scenario it is not possible t o have a proﬁtable strategy
that creates as many trade signals as “no-trade” signals, becaus e it would accumulate enormous
commissioncosts. For that reason αis selected with the aim to geta logicalratioofabout 20% long,
20%shortand 60%stationarylabels. The eﬀect ofvaryingthe para meterαon the classdistribution
11

Convolution Convolution Predictions Feature Time Series Convolution LSTM 
Figure 2: CNN-LSTM model
Table 2: Example of sample distribution across classes depe nding on αfor prediction horizon k= 100
α Down Stationary Up
1.0×10−50.39 0.17 0.45
2.0×10−50.38 0.19 0.43
5.0×10−50.35 0.25 0.41
1.0×10−40.30 0.33 0.36
2.0×10−40.23 0.49 0.28
3.0×10−40.18 0.60 0.22
3.5×10−40.15 0.66 0.19
of labels is shown in Table 2. Note that increasing the αallows for reducing the number of trade
signals which should be changed depending on the actual commission a nd slippage costs that are
expected to occur.
We tested the CNN and LSTM models using the raw features and the p roposed stationary
features separately and compared the results. The architectur e of the three models that were
tested is described bellow.
The proposed CNN model consists of the following sequential layers :
1. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (10 ,42)
2. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (10 ,)
3. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (8 ,)
4. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (6 ,)
5. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (4 ,)
6. Fully connected layer with 32 neurons
7. Fully connected layer with 3 neurons
The activation function used for all the convolutional and fully conn ected layer of the CNN is the
Parametric Rectifying Linear Unit (PRELU) [40]. The last layer uses th e softmax function for the
12

0 50 100 150 200 250 300
LSTM step0.300.320.34CostTrain
Test
Figure 3: Mean cost per recurrent step of the LSTM network
prediction of the probability distribution between the diﬀerent class es. All the convolutional layers
are followed by a Batch Normalization (BN) layer after them.
The LSTM network uses 32 hidden neurons followed by a feed-forwa rd layer with 64 neurons
using Dropout and PRELU as activation function. Experimentally we f ound out that the hid-
den layer of the LSTM should contain 64 or less hidden neurons to avo id over-ﬁtting the model.
Experimenting with higher number of hidden neurons would be feasible if the dataset was even
larger.
Finally the CNN-LSTM model applies the convolutional feature extra ction layers on the input
and then feeds them in the correct temporal order to an LSTM mod el. The CNN component is
comprised of the following layers:
1. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (5 ,42)
2. 1D Convolution with 16 ﬁlters of size (5 ,)
3. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (5 ,)
4. 1D Convolution with 32 ﬁlters of size (5 ,)
Note that the receptive ﬁeld of each convolutional ﬁlter in the CNN m odule is smaller that the
standalone CNN, since the LSTM can capture most of the informatio n from past time steps. The
LSTM module has the same exact architecture as the standalone LS TM. A visual representation
of this CNN-LSTM model is shown in Figure 2. Likewise, PRELU is the act ivation function used
for the CNN and the fully connected layers, while the softmax funct ion is used for the output layer
of the network to predict the probability distribution of the classes .
One recurring eﬀect we observe when training LSTM networks on LO B data is that for the ﬁrst
steps of observation the predictions yiyield a bigger cross entropy cost, meaning worse performance
in our metrics. We run a set of experiments where the LSTM was train ed for all the steps of the
input windows T. The resulting mean cost per time step can be observed in Figure 3. A s a result,
trying to predict the price movement using insuﬃcient past informat ion is not possible and should
be avoided since it leads to noisy gradients. To avoid this, a “burn-in” input is initially used to
build its initial perception of the market before actually making corre ct decisions. In essence the
ﬁrst “burn-in” steps of the input are skipped, by not allowing any gr adient to alter our model until
after the 100th time step. We also apply the same method to the CNN -LSTM model.
13

Table 3: Experimental results for diﬀerent prediction hori zonsk. The values that are reported are the mean of each
metric for the last 20 training epochs.
Feature Type Model Mean Recall Mean Precision Mean F1 Cohen’s κ
Prediction Horizon k= 10
Raw ValuesSVM 0.35 0.43 0.33 0.04
MLP 0.34 0.34 0.09 0.00
CNN 0.51 0.42 0.38 0.14
LSTM 0.49 0.41 0.35 0.12
Stationary FeaturesSVM 0.33 0.46 0.30 0.011
MLP 0.34 0.35 0.09 0.00
CNN 0.54 0.44 0.43 0.19
LSTM 0.55 0.45 0.42 0.18
CNNLSTM 0.56 0.45 0.44 0.21
Prediction Horizon k= 50
Raw ValuesSVM 0.35 0.41 0.32 0.03
MLP 0.41 0.38 0.21 0.04
CNN 0.50 0.42 0.37 0.13
LSTM 0.46 0.40 0.34 0.10
Stationary FeaturesSVM 0.39 0.41 0.38 0.09
MLP 0.49 0.43 0.38 0.14
CNN 0.55 0.45 0.43 0.20
LSTM 0.56 0.46 0.44 0.21
CNNLSTM 0.56 0.47 0.47 0.24
Prediction Horizon k= 100
Raw ValuesSVM 0.35 0.46 0.33 0.05
MLP 0.45 0.39 0.26 0.06
CNN 0.49 0.42 0.37 0.12
LSTM 0.45 0.39 0.34 0.09
Stationary FeaturesSVM 0.36 0.46 0.35 0.07
MLP 0.50 0.43 0.39 0.14
CNN 0.54 0.46 0.44 0.21
LSTM 0.56 0.46 0.44 0.20
CNNLSTM 0.55 0.47 0.48 0.24
Prediction Horizon k= 200
Raw ValuesSVM 0.35 0.44 0.31 0.04
MLP 0.44 0.40 0.32 0.08
CNN 0.47 0.43 0.39 0.14
LSTM 0.42 0.39 0.36 0.08
Stationary FeaturesSVM 0.38 0.46 0.36 0.10
MLP 0.49 0.45 0.42 0.17
CNN 0.51 0.47 0.45 0.20
LSTM 0.52 0.47 0.46 0.22
CNNLSTM 0.53 0.48 0.49 0.25
14

0 20 40 60 80 100
Training Epoch0.3250.3500.3750.4000.4250.4500.4750.500F1
0 20 40 60 80 100
Training Epoch0.100.120.140.160.180.200.220.240.26Cohen's κLSTM Train
LSTM Test
MLP Train
MLP Test
CNN Train
CNN Test
CNNLSTM Train
CNNLSTM Test
Figure 4: F1 and Cohen’s κmetrics during training for prediction horizon k= 100. Plots are smoothed with a mean
ﬁlter with window=3 to reduce ﬂuctuations.
For training the models, the dataset is split as follows. The ﬁrst 7 day s of each stock are used
to train the models, while the ﬁnal 3 days are used as test data. The experiments were conducted
for 4 diﬀerent prediction horizons k, as deﬁned in (9) and (10).
Performance is measured using Cohen’s kappa [41], which is used to ev aluate the concordance
between sets of given answers, taking into consideration the poss ibility of random agreements hap-
pening. The mean recall, mean precision and mean F1 score between a ll 3 classes is also reported.
Recall is the number of true positives samples divided by the sum of tr ue positives and false nega-
tives, while precision is the number of true positive divided by the sum o f true positives and false
positives. F1 score is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall m etrics.
The results of the experiments are shown in Table 3. The results are compared for the models
trained on the raw price features with the ones trained using the ex tracted stationary features. The
results conﬁrm that extracting stationary features from the da ta signiﬁcantly improve performance
of Deep Learning models such as CNNs and LSTMs.
We also trained a Linear SVM model and a simple MLP model and compare d them to the DL
models. The SVM model wastrained usingStochastic GradientDesce nt since the sizeofthe dataset
is too large to use a regular Quadratic Programming solver. The SVM m odel implementation is
provided by the sklearn library [42]. The MLP model consists of three fully connected layers with
sizes128, 64, 32, and PRELUasactivations foreachlayers. Dropo ut is alsoused to avoidoverﬁtting
and the softmax activation function was used in the last layer.
Since both the SVM and the MLP modelscannot iterateovertimestep s to gainthe same amount
of information as the CNN and LSTM-based models, a window of 50 dep th events is used and is
ﬂattened into a single sample. This process is applied in a rolling fashion f or all the dataset to
generate a dataset upon which the two models can be trained. One im portant note is the training
ﬂuctuations that are observed in Figure 4, which are caused by the great class imbalance. Similar
issues where observed in initial experiments with CNN and LSTM models but using the weighted
loss described in 5.4 the ﬂuctuations subsided.
The proposed stationary price features signiﬁcantly outperform the raw price features for all the
tested models. This can be attributed to a great extent to the sta tionary nature of the proposed
features. The employed price diﬀerences provide an intrinsically sta tionary and normalized price
measure that can be directly used. This is in contrast with the raw pr ice values that requires
careful normalization to ensure that their values remain into a reas onable range and suﬀer for
signiﬁcantlynon-stationarityissueswhen the priceincreasesto lev elsnot seen before. By converting
15

the actual prices to the their diﬀerence to the mid price and normaliz e that, this important feature
is exaggerated to avoid being suppressed by the much larger price m ovements through time. The
proposed combination model CNN-LSTM also outperforms its separ ated individual component
models as shown in Figure 4 and Table 3 showing that it can better hand le the LOB data and use
them to take advantage of the microstructure existing within the d ata to produce more accurate
predictions.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we proposed a novel method for extracting stationa ry features from raw LOB
data, suitable for use with diﬀerent DL models. Using diﬀerent ML mod els, i.e., SVMs, MLPs,
CNNs and LSTMs, it was experimentally demonstrated that the prop osed features signiﬁcantly
outperform the raw price features. The proposed stationary fe atures achieve this by making the
diﬀerence between the prices in the LOB depth the main metric instea d of the price itself, which
usually ﬂuctuates much more through time than the price level within the LOB. A novel combined
CNN-LSTM model was also proposed for time series predictions and it was demonstrated that
exhibits more stable behaviour and leads to better results that the CNN and LSTM models.
There are several interesting future research directions. As wit h all the DL application, more
data would enable the use of bigger models that would not be at risk of being overtrained as it
was observed in this work. An RNN-type of network could be also use d to perform a form of
“intelligent” r-sampling extracting useful features from a speciﬁc and limited time-interval of depth
events, which would avoid losing information and allow for the later mod els produce prediction for
a certain time period and not for a number of following events. Anoth er important addition would
be an attention mechanism [21], [43], which would allow for the better ob servation of the features
by the network allowing it to ignore noisy parts of the data and use on ly the relevant information.
Acknowledgment
The research leading to these results has received funding from th e H2020 Project BigData-
Finance MSCA-ITN-ETN 675044 (http://bigdataﬁnance.eu), Train ing for Big Data in Financial
Research and Risk Management.
References
[1] H. Deng, L. Zhang, X. Shu, Feature memory-based deep recur rent neural network for language
modeling, Applied Soft Computing 68 (2018) 432–446.
[2] M. Larsson, Y. Zhang, F. Kahl, Robust abdominal organ segmen tation using regional convo-
lutional neural networks, Applied Soft Computing.
[3] A. Van Den Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals, A. G raves, N. Kalchbren-
ner, A. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.03499.
[4] F. Black, M. Scholes, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities , Journal of Political
Economy 81 (3) (1973) 637–654.
16

[5] R. Cont, S. Stoikov, R. Talreja, A stochastic model for order b ook dynamics, Operations
research 58 (3) (2010) 549–563.
[6] F. M. Bandi, R. Ren` o, Price and volatility co-jumps, Journal of F inancial Economics 119 (1)
(2016) 107–146.
[7] Y. A¨ ıt-Sahalia, P. A. Mykland, Estimating volatility in the presence of market microstructure
noise: A review of the theory and practical considerations, in: Han dbook of ﬁnancial time
series, Springer, 2009, pp. 577–598.
[8] A. N. Kercheval, Y. Zhang, Modelling high-frequency limit order bo ok dynamics with support
vector machines, Quantitative Finance 15 (8) (2015) 1315–1329.
[9] A. Tsantekidis, N. Passalis, A. Tefas, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj , A. Iosiﬁdis, Using deep
learningtodetectpricechangeindicationsinﬁnancialmarkets,in: P roceedingsoftheEuropean
Signal Processing Conference, 2017, pp. 2511–2515.
[10] V. Vapnik, I. Guyon, T. Hastie, Support vector machines, Mac h. Learn 20 (3) (1995) 273–297.
[11] A. Kazem, E. Shariﬁ, F. K. Hussain, M. Saberi, O. K. Hussain, Su pport vector regression with
chaos-based ﬁreﬂy algorithm for stock market price forecasting , Applied soft computing 13 (2)
(2013) 947–958.
[12] T.-J. Hsieh, H.-F. Hsiao, W.-C. Yeh, Forecasting stock markets using wavelet transforms and
recurrent neural networks: An integrated system based on art iﬁcial bee colony algorithm,
Applied soft computing 11 (2) (2011) 2510–2525.
[13] L. Lei, Wavelet neural network prediction method of stock pric e trend based on rough set
attribute reduction, Applied Soft Computing 62 (2018) 923–932.
[14] K. Michell, et al., A stock market risk forecasting model through integration of switching
regime, anﬁs and garch techniques, Applied Soft Computing 67 (201 8) 106–116.
[15] C.-F. Huang, A hybrid stock selection model using genetic algorit hms and support vector
regression, Applied Soft Computing 12 (2) (2012) 807–818.
[16] S. Galeshchuk, Neural networks performance in exchange ra te prediction, Neurocomputing 172
(2016) 446–452.
[17] J. Heaton, N. Polson, J. Witte, Deep portfolio theory, arXiv pr eprint arXiv:1605.07230.
[18] L. Takeuchi, Y.-Y. A. Lee, Applying deep learning to enhance mom entum trading strategies
in stocks.
[19] R. Xiong, E. P. Nichols, Y. Shen, Deep learning stock volatility with google domestic trends,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.04916.
[20] A. Graves, A.-r. Mohamed, G. Hinton, Speech recognition with d eep recurrent neural net-
works, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, 2013, pp. 6645–6649.
17

[21] K. Xu, J. Ba, R. Kiros, K. Cho, A. C. Courville, R. Salakhutdinov, R. S. Zemel, Y. Bengio,
Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual a ttention., in: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 14, 20 15, pp. 77–81.
[22] J. Mao, W. Xu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, Z. Huang, A. Yuille, Deep captio ning with multimodal
recurrent neural networks (m-rnn), arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6 632.
[23] Y. Zhu, O. Groth, M. Bernstein, L. Fei-Fei, Visual7w: Grounded question answeringin images,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat tern Recognition, 2016,
pp. 4995–5004.
[24] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, et al., Convolutional networks for images, speech, and time series, The
handbook of brain theory and neural networks 3361 (10) (1995) 1995.
[25] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, Ne ural Computation 9 (8) (1997)
1735–1780.
[26] D.-x. Niu, H.-f. Shi, D. D. Wu, Short-term load forecasting using bayesian neural networks
learned by hybrid monte carlo algorithm, Applied Soft Computing 12 (6 ) (2012) 1822–1827.
[27] L. Xi, H. Muzhou, M. H. Lee, J. Li, D. Wei, H. Hai, Y. Wu, A new cons tructive neural
network method for noise processing and its application on stock ma rket prediction, Applied
Soft Computing 15 (2014) 57–66.
[28] D. T. Tran, A. Iosiﬁdis, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, Temporal a ttention augmented bilinear
network for ﬁnancial time-series data analysis, arXiv preprint arX iv:1712.00975.
[29] A. Ntakaris, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, A. Iosiﬁdis, Mid-price p rediction based on machine
learning methods with technical and quantitative indicators.
[30] D. T. Tran, M. Magris, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, A. Iosiﬁdis, T ensor representation in high-
frequency ﬁnancial data for price change prediction, in: Computa tional Intelligence (SSCI),
2017 IEEE Symposium Series on, IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–7.
[31] A. Tsantekidis, N. Passalis, A. Tefas, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbou j, A. Iosiﬁdis, Forecasting
stock prices from the limit order book using convolutional neural ne tworks, in: Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Business Informatics, Vol. 1, 2017, pp. 7 –12.
[32] N. Passalis, A. Tsantekidis, A. Tefas, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbou j, A. Iosiﬁdis, Time-series
classiﬁcation using neural bag-of-features, in: Proceedings of t he European Signal Processing
Conference, 2017, pp. 301–305.
[33] D. Yang, Q. Zhang, Drift-independent volatility estimation base d on high, low, open, and close
prices, The Journal of Business 73 (3) (2000) 477–492.
[34] A. Ntakaris, M. Magris, J. Kanniainen, M. Gabbouj, A. Iosiﬁdis, Benchmark dataset for mid-
price prediction of limit order book data, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03 233.
[35] M. Siikanen, J. Kanniainen, A. Luoma, What drives the sensitivity of limit order books to
company announcement arrivals?, Economics Letters 159 (2017) 65–68.
18

[36] P. J. Werbos, Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it, Proceedings of
the IEEE 78 (10) (1990) 1550–1560.
[37] T. Tieleman, G. Hinton, Lecture 6.5-rmsprop: Divide the gradien t by a running average of its
recent magnitude, COURSERA: Neural networks for machine learn ing 4 (2) (2012) 26–31.
[38] F. Chollet, et al., Keras, https://github.com/keras-team/keras (2015).
[39] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. B. et at.,
TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous syst ems, software available
from tensorﬂow.org (2015).
URLhttps://www.tensorflow.org/
[40] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Delving deep into rectiﬁers: Su rpassing human-level per-
formance on imagenet classiﬁcation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE In ternational Conference on
Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
[41] J. Cohen, A coeﬃcient of agreement for nominal scales, Educa tional and Psychological Mea-
surement 20 (1) (1960) 37–46.
[42] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirio n, O. Grisel, M. Blondel,
P.Prettenhofer,R.Weiss, V.Dubourg, etal., Scikit-learn: Machin elearninginpython, Journal
of Machine Learning Research 12 (Oct) (2011) 2825–2830.
[43] K.Cho, A. Courville, Y. Bengio, Describingmultimedia contentusin g attention-basedencoder-
decoder networks, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 17 (11) (2015 ) 1875–1886.
19

