 
 
 
 
 
Effects of Limit Order Book Information Level 
on Market Stability Metrics 
 
 14-09 | November 25 , 2014  
Mark Paddrik  
Office of Financial Research  
Mark.Paddrik@treasury.gov  
 Roy Hayes  
University of Virginia  
rlh8t@virginia.edu  
 
William Scherer  
University of Virginia  
wts@virginia.edu  
 Peter Beling  
University of Virginia  
pb3a@virginia.edu  
 
 
  
The Office of Financial Research (OFR) Working Paper Series allows members of the OFR staff 
and their coauthors to disseminate preliminary research findings in a format intended to generate 
discussion and critical comments.  Papers in the OFR Working Paper Series are works in progress 
and subject to revision.  
 
Views and opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent official 
positions or policy of the OFR or Treasury. Comments and suggestions for improvements are 
welcome and should be directed to the authors. OFR working papers may be quoted without 
additional permission. 
 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   2  
Effects of Limit Order Book Information Level 
on Market Stability Metrics 
Mark Paddrik, Roy Hayes, William Scherer, Peter Beling 
 
 
Abstract 
 
 
Using an agent -based model of the limit order book , we explore how  the levels  of information 
available to participants, exchanges, and regulators can be used to improve our understanding  of the 
stability and resiliency of a market .  Ultimately, w e want to know if electronic market data contains 
previously undetected information  that could allow us to better assess  market  stability .   
 
Using data produced in the controlled environment of  an agent -based model’s li mit order book , we 
exam ine various resiliency indicators  to determine their predictive capabilities. Most of the types of 
data created ha ve traditionally been available either  publicly or on a restricted basis to regulators and 
exchanges, but other types have  never been collected .  We confirm ed our finding s using actual order 
flow data with user identification s included from the CME  (Chicago Mercantile Exchange) and New 
York Mercantile Exchange ( NYMEX ).  Our findings strongly suggest that high -fidelity 
microstructure data in combination with price data can be used to define stability indicator s capable 
of reliably signaling a high likelihood for an imminent flash crash event about  one minute before it 
occurs.  
 
 
 
Acknowledgments:  The authors are very grateful to Philip Maymin, Michael Wellman, Nathan Palmar, Greg Feldberg 
and Wendy Wagner-Smith for their help and guidance with this paper. Special acknowledgement is due Andrew Todd 
for his help in the development of the agent-based simulation used in this paper. 
 
 
The research presented in this paper was authored by Mark Paddrik,  Roy Hayes, William Scherer, Peter Beling,  former 
contractor s for the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) who work ed under CFTC OCE contract . The 
Office of the Chief Economist and CFTC economists produce original research on a broad range of topics relevant to 
the CFTC’s mandate to regulate commodity futures markets, commodity options markets, and the expanded mandate to 
regulate the swaps mark ets under  the Dodd -Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.   These papers are 
often presented at conferences and many of these papers are later published by peer -review and other scholarly 
outlets.   The analyses and conclusions expressed in th is paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of 
other members of the Office of the Chief Economist, other Commission staff, or the Commission itself.  
  

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   3 1.  Introduction 
On May 6 , 2010, the U.S stock market experienced one of the most seve re price drops in its history .  
Known as the May 6th Flash Crash,  the D ow Jones Industrial Average  fell 5 percent  in less than five 
minutes . The bulk of losses  were recovered  in the next 15 minute s of trading .  The crash raised 
concerns about the stability of capital markets and resulted in a joint investigation by the U.S.  
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the U.S . Commodity Futures Trading Commission  
(CFTC ) (CFTC  and SEC, 2010) .   
The May 6th Flash Cra sh seems to be singular in the sense that no following events have rivaled its 
depth, breadth, and speed of price movement .  Flash crashes on a s maller  scale, however, occur  
frequently .  Between 2006 and 2012 , there were 18,520 incidents  that we term mini flash crashes,  in 
which  a single security  experienced abrupt and severe price change over a  short period of time 
(Johnson et al. , 20 12) .  Although the underlying causes of mini flash crashes vary (Golub, 2012) , 
they share some uniform markers of stress tha t, if recognized in advance, could be the basis for 
market intervention aimed at increasing price stability .   
The metrics TR-VPIN (Easley et al., 2011) , and BV-VPIN (Easley et al., 2012)  were both developed 
to try to predict flash crashes.  These metrics have considerable limitations  because  they were 
constructed using  in-sample metric calibration with no out- of-sample testing, have  high false 
positive rates , and are general ineffective at predicting short term volatility once accounting for 
volume dynamic s (Andersen and Bondarenko, 2014).  Moreover, t he VPIN metrics use only 
transactional information and do not take into account even basic information on about the limit 
order book , which is the predominant trading mechanism in today’s electron ic equities and futures 
markets. However,  it has been observed that the limit order book  offers a structure that makes it 
possible to examine strains on the state of price formation and overall market stability (Duong, 
2014).   
In this paper, we examine the hypothesis that the quality of market stability metrics can be improved 
by making use of order flow information.  A central point of investigation is to assess the increases 
in metric quality associated with moving from publically available data (such as Level 2 quotes) to 
increasingly more detailed data such as that held by regulators , which may contain trader 
identification or other restricted information.  This hypothesis is difficult to test empirically, because 
much of the historical data about the inner workings of the limit order book, often called 
microstructure data, is available only to regulators and exchanges and, in many cases, is too complex 
and time consuming to examine.  But regulatory attention to this process is needed, because price 
discovery is viewed as the most important product that security or futures markets offer and must 
be treated as a public good, essential to financial stability (Hasbrouck, 1995). 
A number of stability metrics are considered in this paper, including several designed specifically to 
make use of fine-grained information such as Level 6  data.  Stability m etrics are assessed on their 
ability to  predict impending destabilization in the form of flash crashes.  We tested market data 
produced by an agent -based simulation model that incorporates a limit order book mechanism  and 
associated  microstructure data at all levels .  The simulation model has zero -intelligence agents, and 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   4 so is limited in fidelity but is tun ed to have styled facts similar to those of the historical  market.  Our 
key conclusion is that metrics  using more detailed market microstructure data had  the greatest power 
to predict flash crashes  in the simulated  market .  To validate the conclusions from the simulation, 
we used a small set of actual market data  to show  that the metrics most  effective  on the simulated 
data were also most effective in  predicting the  May 6 , 2010 , Flash Crash of the E -Mini S&P 500 
futures marke t and the September 17 , 2012, mini flash crash of the Light Sweet Crude Oil futures 
market  one minute in advance .   
The paper is organized as follows: 
 Section 2 gives general background on  the electronic order book and what occurs when i t 
becomes unstable in advance of and during flash crashes.  The concepts introduced in this 
section are foundational to the stability metrics proposed in Section 4. 
 Section 3 describes the agent-based simulation model used to produce the principal datasets 
used to test the stability metrics.   
 Section 4 covers how different data levels may be used to determine possible measures of 
market stability.   
 Section 5 presents results for testing of the stability metrics on the simulated data simulated.   
 Section 6 describes the ability of each stability metric to predict two historical flash crashes.   
 Section 7 summarizes our results and conclusions, including a discussion of the 
opportunities that this method may offer to operational risk management. 
 
2.  Background 
The rapid and wide adoption of computer and commu nications technology during the early 1990s 
drove many exchanges interested in increasing market participation and decreasing costs to build 
electronic platforms for trade. The majority of financial trading activity mov ed off the physical 
trading floors and on to electronic exchanges. Trading automatically using sophisticated computers 
and algorithms enabled the exchanges to offer a wider set of financial instruments , which was once 
restrict ed by physical floor space.  
This transition to electronic exchanges required a new way to discover the price of an asset in 
market format that would allow participants to interact in a manner similar to that of the physical 
trading floor.  The result was the electronic order book system of trade, which now dominates the 
market.  Th e change has been widely accepted and is generally seen as effective.  
Along with this transformation, however,  new concerns for regulators arose about market 
participant behavior and events such as flash crashes.  These concerns established the need for 
regulators to develop the capability to leverage the vast amount of electronic data to evaluate 
participants ’ impacts and prevent similar flash crash events.   
Market stability is heavily dependent on the mechanism of trade and price formulation and 
examining the data produced from the electronic order book mechanism may provide the 
information needed to prevent future price destabilizations.  The first step is to understand how the 
electronic order book functions.   

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   5 The Electronic Limit Order Book Market 
The electronic order book, the main mechanism for price discovery and trade on exchanges, is a 
publicly visible mechanism providing bids and offers. The order book contains a price and a 
quantity of limit orders (Glosten, 199 4).  A trade occurs when a new order is entered or an existing 
order’s price is modified  so the order crosses the spread of best bid and best ask offers.  The new or 
modified order transacts against the best opposing orders using a price-time priority, removing them 
from the order book un til the new or modified order is either fully or partially filled, leaving the rest 
of the quantity of the order to become the new best bid or offer.  Other order types are not publicly 
visible, such as stop-loss and max-show orders that follow additional rules.  However, all end up 
becoming limit orders before execution.   
Price discovery results from the deliberation between the buyers and sellers who place, modify, and 
cancel orders, leading to trades when an agreeable price can be found.  The individual decisions and 
interactions between market participants generate the underlying microstructure of the limit order 
book, which then results in the pricing of assets.  Figure 1 gives an example of how the market 
typica
lly responds to reflect this price discovery process.  Although the electronic order book and its 
rules are relatively simple, the behavior of a market is complex, because it includes a large number of 
participants who interact with each other stochastically, making analysis difficult (Anderson, 1988).   
Step  Event  Order Book Plot  Last Trade Price  
1 A relatively large sell order 
arrives that cross es the bid -ask 
spread of $12.50 /$12.51, 
consuming limit buy orders from 
$12.50 to $12.49 
 $12.50  
2 Prices adjust sharply to the 
executed trade , leaving a $0.03  
bid-ask spread between 
$12.48/ $12.51  
 $12.48-$12.51 
3 The widened spread represents a 
greater uncertainty of the price of 
the asset  
4 The wide spread is followed by a 
surge in new orders at various 
price levels , representing the price 
discovery with increased certainty  
5 As new orders are introduced , the 
bid-ask spread narrows  and a new 
equilibrium price is reached  
 $12.49 
Figure 1 : The Dynamics of the Limit Order Book 
 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   6 Market Design Problems and Controversy 
The price discovery process of the limit order book depicted in Figure 1 does not always settle in an 
orderly manner.  The market can suddenly lose apparent resiliency, resulting in prices soaring or 
plunging for short periods of time.  These events, mini flash crashes, are characterized by the price 
of an asset drastically changing for short periods of time until the market can recover.   
The recovery process can happen in two ways.  The first, and most common, allows market forces 
to reach an equilibrium price naturally through the continual placing of new orders into the pricing 
mechanism.  The second is an intervention, known as a circuit breaker, where the exchange pauses 
trade for a predetermined amount of time, stopping the price mechanism.  This gives market 
participants more time to observe market conditions and generate new orders to  bring equilibrium 
back to the pricing discovery process (Subrahmanyam, 1994).   
Although such pricing problem s occurred  some  9,000 times  between 2007 and 2010 (Nanex, 2011), 
they were not seen as a concern because they could be stopped  through  the circuit breaker process 
and the ir impact was minimal .  However, i n 2010,  one of these de stabilizing events made headlines 
when  most major equities, futures, and commodities markets plunged in near unison , causing more 
than a trillion dollars of asset value to be lost in less than five minutes before recovering .   
The CFTC-SEC staff report on the events of May 6th Flash Crash identified an automated execution 
algorithm that sold a large number of contracts as one catalyst for the crash.  The algorithm, which 
was run on the E-mini S&P 500 futures market, kept pace with the market selling about 9 percent of 
the prev ious minute’s volume .  This process, though used previously with no known negative 
impact, triggered a cascade of selling by firms using high-speed automated trading  (AT), which led  
to “hot potato trading” where these firms rapidly acq uired and then liquidated positions among 
themselves, resulting in steadily declining prices (Kirilenko, 2011).   
These events u nfolded as described in Figure 2 . 
Event  Model Price Points  Effect  
Large sell execution algorithm initialized   Large aggressive sell orders 
enter the market  
Automated trading systems begin to retreat 
from the market as price s fall  24 ticks below the moving 
average  Market depth be gins to 
disappear  
Fundamental traders w ithdraw from the 
market as stop -loss orders are triggered  70 ticks from price at start of 
day Market depth disappears and 
more sell orders are executed  
A market pause is initiated by the exchange  Price falls at least or more than 
1.3 percent per second per 
second  Gives time for slower market 
participants to enter t rades into 
the order book  
Figure 2.  Table of events that occurred during the Flash Crash of May 6, 2010. 
The effect of this event  led to heavy speculation and controversy about how automated trading 
participants trade in markets and whether they may threaten market stability.  Though automated 
systems had been credited with increasing trading volumes and the narrowing of price spreads on 
markets, which have traditionally been seen as indicators of good market quality (Menkveld, 2010 ; 
Hendershot, 2011), others have question ed the value of such systems.  Zhang (2010) show ed there is 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   7 a negative correlation in the relationship between a market’s ability to incorporate information about 
firm fundamentals into asset prices and the presence of automated trading.   
Zhang’s work suggests automated trading orders may have a negative influence on the market ’s 
ability to price assets by obscuring information in the order book.  Since the majority of high-
frequency automated trading market participation orders are placed  within the first few ticks of the 
best bid-ask ( Clark -Joseph, 2013), automated trading orders can narrow price spreads while giving 
the appearance of liquidity. However, when actually transacted, prices may prove to be fleeting and 
less liquid than indicated.   
Electronic Market Data 
Market participants, exchanges, and regulators understand the state of electronic markets and pricing 
of assets by examining market data.  Financial exchanges give different degrees of data on markets 
with varying levels of privacy and informational content available.  Traditionally, the degree of 
information given or sold by exchanges can be broken down into levels of information associated 
with the state of the electronic order book (O’Hara, 2005; Bethal, 2011) .  We have broken down this 
information into six levels in Figure 3.   
 
Level 1: Transaction  Level 2: Transaction and Best Bid/O ffer ( BBO)  
Price: $12.50  
Last Trade: Qty: 10 Time: 11:45:25  Price: $12.50  
Best Bid: 12.50 x100     Best Offer : 12.51 x50 
Last Trade: Qty: 10 Time: 11:45:25 A: Sell Side  
Level 3: Transactions, BBO, and L imit Order B ook 
(LOB)  Level 4: Transactions + Quotes + LOB + order 
flow 
 
  
Level 5: Identifying Level  Level  6: Internal System Level  
 
 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   8 Figure 3: The Levels of Financial Market Data 
Levels 1 and 2 typically are available on public market feeds that allow participants to examine trade 
prices and quoted best bid and offer prices with the demand at that particular price, which are the 
result of aggregated order flow communications between an exchange and individual participants of 
a market.  The distinction between Level 1 and L eve l 2 is that the second level gives the participant 
some underlying knowledge about the state of the market by giving the best bid and ask offers 
instead of using the last reference point of trade price.   
Bid Quantity  Bid Price  Ask Price  Ask Quantity  
50 $10.56  $10.57  140 
36 $10.55  $10.58  67 
142 $10.54  $10.59  89 
32 $10.53  $10.60  52 
49 $10.52  $10.61  103 
100 $10.51  $10.62  40 
110 $10.50  $10.63  205 
65 $10.49  $10.64  178 
258 $10.48  $10.65  245 
178 $10.47  $10.66  90 
Last Trade:  Price  Quantity  Time  Aggressor  
  $   10.57  10 12:56:24.047  Buy Side  
Figure 4: Example of Level 4 Data 
Levels 3 and 4 are publically available data sets, but are traditionally distributed at a cost to users.  
These data levels provide a snap shot view of the limit order book out to some depth (typically 10 
units on both sides of the best bid and offer price).  Figure 4 shows an example of what a market 
participant receiving Level 3 data quotes would see.  Level 4 separates the aggregated snap shot view 
of the limit order book depths data of Level 3 by providing the raw order flow data that is used fill 
the limit order book mechanism.. The order flow data contains new, modified, and canceled limit 
orders place into the mechanism.  
Level 5 and Level 6 information is commonly kept private and is available only to exchanges and 
regul
ators to verify that market participants are complying with rules and processes.  Level 5 data 
provides identification information along with order flow data, so participants know who placed a 
specific order, canceled or modified an order, or who traded a security.  (In Level 4, this order flow 
data is anonymized.)Level 6 includ es all order flow and order book data, regardless of order type 
(marketable, limit, stop-loss, max-show, etc.), which mak es it possible to track and account for al l 
events that occur in a market.  Such detail allows users to create a picture of the state of the market 
at any given time. 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   9  
Figure 5: Average Daily Trade Volume on the New York Stock Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange 
These data levels give various depths of information about the market, but they can be complicated 
to monitor because of the enormous volume of U.S. financial trades per day, as seen in Figure 5.  
Trade data itself represents only about 1 percent of total order flow data, which contains new orders, 
cancel orders, modify orders, and trade data.  The message traffic of order flow data is about 100 
times larger than trade data alone.  (CME Group, 2013).  Because of the large quantities of data, 
users — market participants, exchanges, and regulators — typically will only use a subset of the total 
data available to them . For example regulators generally use a combination of Level 2 and Level 3 
data, with the addition of some private account information when investigating market events.   
In addition, much of this type data is not stored because higher level data is extensive and complex, 
requiring tremendous amounts of computational processing capacity, and such data collection and 
s
torage is costly .  Consequently, large quantities of useful information that might prove helpful to 
regulators ’ study of unexpected or destabilizing market events, such as flash crashes, are not 
available.   
Simply requiring regulators to collect market data at higher levels (such as levels 4, 5, or 6), wh en the 
cost-benefit has not been proven, would not be feasible.  Building and analyzing market designs 
through simulation modeling offer s a lower cost and technically effective experimental platform for 
evaluating the informational value of higher fidelity of financial market data.   
 
3.  The Agent-based Model of the Limit Order Book 
The transition to electronic order books and automated trading has been an impetus for looking at 
market microstructure with new lenses (O’Hara, 2014).  Market simulations offers an experimental 
environment for examining features and characteristics of interests to academics and regulators by 
providing a controlled way to create representative market data useful for analysis (Hayes et al., 
2014). Because little level 4, 5, or 6 electronic order book data is readily available, particularly to the 
academic community ; simulation is an especially necessary tool.   0123456
02468101214
NYSE Daily Trade Volume 
(billions)  CME Daily Trade Volume 
(millions)  CME
NYSE

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   10 Agent-based modeling offers the capable of capturing the organization of exchanges, the intricacies 
of the trading process, and the heterogeneity of market participants, and is thus a powerful method 
for analyzing financial market ( Bookstaber, 2012 ).  Agent based models (ABM) simplify complex 
systems by including a set of individual agents, a topology and an environment ( Farmer, 2010 ). 
In a typical ABM of a financial market, the market participants are agents, the market mechanism is 
the topology and the exogenous flow of information that is relevant to the market is the 
environment.  As a system’s complexity increases, the ability to directly correlate  its macro-level 
behavior with the changes in the underlying micro-level behavior and parameters diminishes.  This 
requires that the micro-level behavior and parameters be more fully examined and defined to 
understand their relationship to the macro outcomes.  ABM can provide regulators with an 
experimental environment that can comprehend complex system outcomes. 
For this reason, designers of ABM ’s face a trade -off between complexity and explanatory power.  In 
the context of financial markets, for example, agents are endowed with varying degrees of 
sophistication with regard to how they adapt, predict and optimize within their environment.  To 
create an ABM of a financial market, it is important  to determine what features are needed for 
creating a proper representative market without overly complicating the framework.  Because a 
market is a system constructed of the participants and the rules governing their interaction (e.g.  
trade and pricing), it is necessary to focus on these two parts and set aside, for simplification 
purposes, the uncertain environment aspect which has indefinite set of conditions.  Focusing on the  
agents and the topology is important to note, because it presumes that the market participants in this 
simulation will focus on their individual conditions and the single market in which they operate and 
not on environmental variables like other markets or economic condition that could affect their 
decisions. We will later implement an agent to help create the environmental conditions of the crash. 
3.1 The Agents 
Of the two components our model tries to capture, the agents are more difficult to specify as their 
design needs to mimic that of true market participants.  The difficulty of balancing specificity of 
traders’  characteristics while still making agents that are representative of the general population is 
difficult .  Current literature suggests that the markets are divided into subcategories of participants 
and the combinations of trading styles that are responsible for emergent market events.  These 
combinatorial aspects led to the design of multiple categories of trading agents in the simulation. 
From work done by Kirilenko et al. (2011), it was possible to characterize  market participants in to 
one of six classes  of agent types, though in real life a trader may play multiple roles :  
i. Fundamental Buyers :  take long positions on the asset and trade with a low frequency. 
ii. Fundamental Sellers :  take short positions on the asset and trade with a low frequency. 
iii. Small : randomly take small long or short positions (50%/50%) on the asset and trade with a 
very low frequency.  

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   11 iv. Market Makers:  take the position of straddling both sides of the market by taking long and 
short positions on an asset.  These intermediaries’ are generally seen as liquidity providers to 
markets through their placement of orders on both sides of the order book.  
v. Opportunistic Traders:  take long or short positions on the asset during the duration of the 
market day like a fundamental participant.  However, they implement trading strategies that 
make them resemble Intermediaries because they do not take large positions .  
vi. High Frequency Traders  (HFT) : take long or short positions on an asset for short periods 
and trading with high frequency near the best-ask and best-bid sides of the book. HFTs are 
generally described as simple momentum strategy (Clark -Joseph, 2013 ).  As the bid/ask 
depth becomes imbalanced, HFTs will tend to trade in the same direction as the imbalance.  
In other words, if there are excess bids in the order book, HFTs have a higher probability of 
placing a buy order; such a strategy was indicated in real market data provided by the CFTC.  
In general, HFT’s will allow themselves to take large positions for short periods of time, but 
will try to be neutral by the end of day. 
Traditional economic approaches to build agents focuses on the role of intelligent (rational) agents 
that seek to maximize a utility function. However, this assumes that humans have perfect 
information and adapt instantly. People are often less than rational, which is a topic of recent 
interest of behavioral economics. Furthermore, rational economic theory relies on the abstraction of 
equilibrium methods to solve these problems, which has been demonstrated to be non- existent 
(Farmer and Foley 2009). 
However as early as the 1990’s zero -intelligence agent descriptions have been used to represent 
aggregate market participant behavior by using random sampling of empirically generated 
distributions to characterize the agent decisions. First introduced by Gode and Sunder (1993) in a 
double auction market, they found that the allocation efficiency of the market derived larger from its 
structure and was indecent of trader’s motivation, intelligence, or learning. This methodology has 
come to dominate the ABM limit order book literature with several expansion of the models 
(Maslov, 2000; Challet and Stinchombe, 2001; Farmer et al., 2005; Preis et al., 2006) and found to 
explain the majority of general dynamics like spread variance and price diffusion rates.  
Our model will consider three such zero intelligence characteristics, based on empirical data of the 
S&P 500 E-mini futures market, three days prior and including the May 6th 2010 crash1, to describe 
the agents in this model:  
1. Order Arrival Rate: A new orders is placed by an agent by an arrival process that follows a 
Poisson  distribution with a mean observed from the empirical order submission rate of a 
class.2  
2. Order Size: An order’ s size is randomly selected based on the empirical distribution of order 
sizes of a class.  
                                                 
1 The data and the agent distributions used in the construction of the limit order book ABM cannot be made public out 
of concerns of providing detailed trading strategy secrets on order size and placement. 
2 Agents only manage a single order at a time. If an agent has an old order that is still in the order book at the time it is 
scheduled to place a new order, it cancels the old order before adding the new order to the market. 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   12 3. Order Placement : An order ’s price is randomly selected based on the empirical distribution 
of orders placed based of the distance from the current best bid and best ask of a class. 
Additionally we must know two other characteristics to fully characterize the agents in the 
definitions stated above which requires using features from the near-zero intelligence literature 
(Paddrik et al., 2012; Wah and Wellman, 2013 ).  These characteristics include which side of the book 
to place an order (i.e. place a buy or sell order) and whether the agents have limits on their 
inventor
y.  These characteristics are partially connected because the probability of a buy or sell order 
depends on how close an agent is to a position limit. 
1. Position Limit: The decision to give an agent a limit is based on the averages derived from 
Kirilenko et al.  (2011).3  From these observations Market Makers, Opportunistic Traders, and 
High Frequency Traders  all appeared to have some form of risk control built into their behavior 
that limited the positions that they take throughout the day.  A governing algorithm was 
placed on top of a random uniform distribution for the decision to buy or sell, as seen 
below.  The algorithm provides position limits control to all these agents but allows the 
process to be applied to all the agent 
 
𝑃(𝐵𝑢𝑦)=
{     1− 𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 >𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
2
         𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
|𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 |   𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 <𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
2    
0.5                                        𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒   
𝑃(𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙)= 1−𝑃(𝐵𝑢𝑦)                                                                                                     
 
2. HFT Buy Sell Decision: Additionally this class of trader would use the order book depth of 
the best bid and best ask to predict price, a trend that follows with work done by Cont et al. 
(2013).  This replace the random uniform distribution decision to buy or sell when 
𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 is between   1
2 2
 
𝑃(𝐵𝑢𝑦)=𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐵𝑖𝑑𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐵𝑖𝑑𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ+ 𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐴𝑠𝑘𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ       𝑃(𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙)=𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐴𝑠𝑘𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ
𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐵𝑖𝑑𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ+ 𝐵𝑒𝑠𝑡𝐴𝑠𝑘𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ 
 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 and 1𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 with:  
3.2 The Market Topology 
The
 design of the simulated market exchange systems follows a traditional “price-then-time ” order 
book market using a set of agents to insert transactional messages to the order book. By proving 
this,
 topography asset price creation on the part of the market participants can take place through 
their individual actions (order, cancel), and the market matching engine connecting them (execute).  
                                                 
3 See Appendix A for exact numbers . 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   13 This format is consistent with a double auction market traditionally used in financial and 
commodities markets (Friedman and Rust, 1993). 
3.3 Model Validation  
With the agents and the correct market topology in plac e,4 the model was validated in Paddrik et al. 
(2012) to show it resembles the manner in which that market typically functions by assessing the 
“stylized facts” (Kaldor, 1961 ) of the pricing series associated with that market. Stylized facts are a 
set of statistical characteristics found in the price-time series data which represents the macro 
dynamic of the underlying demand and supply of individual participants in the market . The features 
traditionally tested included the distribution of price returns, volatility clustering, absence of 
autocorrelation of price returns, and aggregation of price returns (Maslov, 2000; Challet and 
Stinchombe, 2001) . 
Additionally, a comparison was done between the simulation ’s output and empirical data of the S&P 
500 E-mini futures market  for the period under  investigation. As Table 1 shows, the model appears 
to have the same characteristics in trade volume and cancelation rates .  
Table 1: Real versus Simulated E-Mini: Trade Volume and Cancellation Rate  
Trader Type  Simulated 
Volume  Actual Volume  Simulated 
Cancelation Rate  Actual 
Cancelation Rate  
Small  1% 1% 40% 20-40% 
Fundamental Buyers  10% 9% 44% 20-40% 
Fundamental Sellers  10% 9% 44% 20-40% 
Market Makers  10% 10% 35% 20-40% 
Opportunistic  31% 33% 50% 40-60% 
High Frequency  38% 38% 77% 70-80% 
 
3.4 Model Output    
Using the simulation environment, we were able to produce limit order book data for various 
market conditions which allowed us to observe stable and destabilized markets pricing conditions.  
The destabilizing condition in our simulation was introduction of an algorithmic trader, similar to 
the one that initiated the May 6th Flash Crash, which was the catalyst to other mini flash crashes.  
Although all destabilizing events do not occur exactly this way, our method produced conditions in a 
controlled manner for producing experimental data for testing.  
                                                 
4 The code for the ABM will be made available upon request by emailing Mark.Paddrik@treasury.gov 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   14  
Figure 6: Real versus Simulated E-Mini: Volume, Moving Average Price, and Order book Depth 
Figure 6 illustrates the results of the simulated price and the moving average volume of a particular 
instance of the simulation .  The graph of the actual E-mini S&P 500 flash crash is shown for 
comparison.  Note the widening separation in the order books bid-ask resting order depth quantities 
and then the sudden collapse.  
 
4.  Measures of Limit Order Book Market Stability 
Traditional stability, or the resiliency of a market, is represented by the term liquidity, which refers to 
the ability to transform one asset into another in a short period without losing value.  The ease of 
this transformation, in terms of time required and price impact is seen as a measure of a market ’s 
state or health (Benic, 2008).  Unfortunately, liquidity is a multidimensional phenomenon, making it 
difficult to encompass in a single measure.  Harris (2003) defines liquidity using four dimensions: 
1. Trading time.  Defined as the ability to execute the transaction immediately at the current 
price.  The waiting time between trades is the measure for trading time. 
2. Tightness.  The ability to buy and sell an asset at about the same price at the same time , 
generally referenced as the instantaneous spread between the best bid and best offer.   
3. Depth.  The ability to buy or sell a certain amount of an asset without influencing the quoted 
price.  A sign of illiquidity would be an adverse market effect on price when trading occurs.   


OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   15 4. Resiliency .  The ability to buy or sell a certain amount of an asset with little influence on the 
quoted price.  Market depth regards only the volume of best bid and best ask prices, but 
resiliency takes the elasticity of supply and demand into account.   
Resiliency, unlike the other three, has no metric associated with its definition, which is often seen as 
an opportunity to observe several features of the electronic order book system when trying to 
characterize resiliency of the market ’s state.   
 
 
Figur
e 7: Market State Diagram 
Figure 7 depicts the state of a market’s  order book with respect to order flow —in and out and 
current state of orders are depicted.  The “IN” flows are characterized by new orders and orders 
modified to increase quantity, which increase the inventory of resting orders held in the order book.  
Order “OUT ” flows are orders leaving the order book that have been executed or canceled and 
orders modified to decrease quantity, which also decreases the inventory of resting orders held in the 
order book.  The order book ’s inventory of resting orders indicates the current demand and supply 
of participant interest for that market.5 
To date, most studies done examining market resiliency have been focused on the impact order out 
flows have on price (Brandt, 2004; Love, 2008; Evans, 2002; Easley, 2010), but little has been done 
examining the effect of order in-flows or the state of resting orders in the order book.  In this 
examination, we look ed at five different indicators that measure price, order flow, and order book 
state to different degrees using the different levels of market data to search for which metric might 
reliably signal the risk of destabilizing events. 
VPIN 
Volume-Synchronized Probability of Informed Trading (VPIN) is an existing indicator developed by 
Easley, López de Prado and O’Hara (2010) . VPIN  is the ratio of average unbalanced volume to total 
volume in a period and requires Level 2 data.  Heuristically, the VPIN metric “measures the fraction 
of volume-weighted trade that arises from informed traders as the informed tend to trade on one-
side of the market and so their activity leads to unbalanced volume. ” (Easley  et al., 2010) In other 
words, there might be an increasing toxicity of orders entering the market.  This metric requires 
                                                 
5 It is important to note that some of these metrics contain parameters that require tuning. In our work, we will select 
similar time scales for all the parameters so they produce new measurements every 30 seconds on average. We do not 
spend time calibrating these parameters to better fit the data, which has been an area of concern in previous research 
(Andersen and Bondarenko, 2014) .   .  


OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   16 being parameterized for the volume bucket size ( 𝑉) and the number of buckets needed to get an 
accurate measure (n).  In our simulation , 𝑉 = 50, and 𝑛 = 506.   
𝑉𝑃𝐼𝑁 =∑|𝑉𝑖𝑆− 𝑉𝑖𝐵|𝑛
𝑖=1
𝑛𝑉 
V: the volume in every bucket  
ViB: volume from buyer-initiated trades  
ViS: volume from seller-initiated trades  
n: the number of buckets used to approximate the expected trade imbalance  
 
Price Impact 
Price Impact in limit order book markets is an existing indicator based on a measure of the effect a 
trade has on an asset’s value .  For this study, we selected the adverse selection component found by 
decomposing the price spread along the lines of Glosten (1987) and used by Hendershott et al.  
(2011) in examining the price impact of algorithmic trading on financial markets.  Empirical 
evide
nce shows order book liquidity and adverse selection are inversely related (Frey, 2006).   
The Price Impact indicator is the cumulative response of the quoted price to a one-time unit shock 
in the order flow as a measure of adverse selection, which accounts for persistence in order flow that  
we might translate as indication of sharp order flow imbalance (Hasbrouck, 1991).  This metric 
requires using aggression (the side of the order book that initiated the trade) as found in Level 2 
data.  It is then parameterized for a time in the future (𝑡+𝑥) , and the current trade price (at time, t) 
is compared.  (Note: In this study, 𝑥 was 30 seconds.)  
𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡 =𝑄𝑡(𝑀𝑡+𝑥− 𝑀𝑡)
𝑚𝑡 
Qt: an indicator variable (+1: for buyer-initiated trades, -1: for seller-initiated trades)  
Mt: midpoint price is the average of the best bid /ask at the time of the trade (t)  
x: time in the future   
 
Window Spread Indicator 
The window spread, a new indicator we developed as part of this work , is a measure of the price 
movement over a period that demonstrates the impact the current price is facing due to market 
order flow without regard to quantity traded, so it only requires Level 1 data.  This metric is 
parameterized to the length of time that the window car ries minimum and maximum values.  In the 
simulation, we set this to 30 seconds. 
 
𝑊𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑤 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = max
𝑡=0,...,𝑖(𝑃𝑡)−min
𝑡=0,…,𝑖(𝑃𝑡) 
Pt: prevailing midpoint price at the time of the trade (t)  
 
 
                                                 
6 The parameters were selected based on the average volume bucket, V, would be equal to 30 seconds during a normal 
period so the model would produce new values every 30 seconds. The number of buckets was selected during based on 
the (Easley et al., 2010) value. 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   17 OBWA Spread 
The Order Book Weighted Average Spread (OBWA) is new indicator we developed as part of this 
w
ork.  OBWA is a weighted average bid price and ask price spread of the order book using the first 
10 best bid ticks and best ask ticks.  The spread gives an aggregated measure of where the majority 
of resting orders are in the order book.  The smaller the value indicates, the closer in agreement 
exists on price between the majority of participants.  OBWA requires level 4 data. 
   
𝑂𝐵𝑊𝐴 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 =∑𝑃𝑖𝑆𝑖𝑛
𝑖=1
∑𝑆𝑖𝑛
𝑖=1−∑𝑃𝑗𝑆𝑗𝑚
𝑗=1
∑𝑆𝑗𝑚
𝑗=1 
S: order size  
P: trade price   
i: ask order  , j: bid order  
n: number of bid limit orders, m: number of ask limit orders 
 
Manual Spread  
The Manual Spread (MS) is another new indicator we developed as part of this work.  The indicator 
is a weighted average bid price and ask price spread of the order book using the first 10 best bid 
ticks and best ask ticks prices.  Orders made by automated trading systems are not included in the 
a
verage to remove any false indications of market resiliency that might be introduced because 
automated trading orders may not provide a true indication of price spread compared to manual 
orders.  Without automated trading orders, we expect a better indication of the strength of the 
market to take “acidic ” order flow (orders that consume the depth of the book).  The caveat to this 
indicator is traders must be categorized  traders and their orders classified, requiring Level 5 data.  
We identified automated trading accounts by the quantity of trading they did solely — 2,000 or more 
actions (new, canceled, or modified orders) in a single market — which is a quantity we determined 
beyond a human’s ability to manage .   
 
𝑀𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = ∑𝑃𝑖𝑆𝑖𝑛
𝑖=1
∑𝑆𝑖𝑛
𝑖=1−∑𝑃𝑗𝑆𝑗𝑚
𝑗=1
∑𝑆𝑗𝑚
𝑗=1 
S: order size  
P: trade price   
i: ask order  , j: bid order  
n: number of bid limit orders, m: number of ask limit orders 
 
5.  Measure Performance in the Agent-Based Model Environment  
To test how well our indicators would respond to market conditions that arise from random and 
complex market transactions, as well as the possible effect of automated trading , we ran the 
simulation 2,000 times on a single i5 processor, taking 23 hours to run.  Each run held the initial 
conditions with respect number of participants, their behavior, and market rules constant, varying 
only the selling behavior of the large selling algorithm used on May 6, 2010.   
𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒 𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐴𝑙𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑚: 𝐶 𝑡= 𝑉𝑡−1∗𝑃𝑇𝑉  

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   18 𝐂𝐭: number of contracts to sell at time t  
𝐕𝐭−𝟏: volume traded in previous minute (t- 1)  
𝐏𝐓𝐕 : percent of trade volume algorithm desires to be of entire market’s volume   
 
The algorithm determines how many contracts it wants to sell, 𝐶𝑡, in the following minute based on 
a preset percentage , 𝑃𝑇𝑉, of the previous minutes volume traded, 𝑉𝑡−1. PTV is varied from 0 
percent to 9 percent, which resulted in a rapidly increasing probability of a mini flash crash above 
about 4 percent, as seen in Figure 8.   
 
Figure 8: Probability Density Function Graph of a Flash Crash in Simulated E-Mini Market 
The indicator results we observed in each of these simulations runs yielded the following set of 
distributions for the indicators under the two conditions of a normal price decline (circuit breaker 
triggering market pause) and flash crash resulting runs as seen in the probability density function 
(PDF) and cumulative density function (CDF) curves in Figure 9.  The results showed the center of 
all indicator distributions, most notably the OBWA distribution, shifted to the right, demonstrating 
that, on average, all the indicators read higher values before the flash crash run versus the normal 
run. 020406080100
0.0% 1.0% 2.0% 3.0% 4.0% 5.0% 6.0% 7.0% 8.0% 9.0%Probability of Flash Crash, %  
PTV  

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   19  
Figure 9 : Indicator PDF and 1 – CDF in Simulated E-Mini Market 
When we further examined the flash crash runs, we were interested in how much advanced warning 
we might expect given the readings of the indicators before the market pause.  In Figure 10, the 
PDF and CDF of the maximum value observed before the market pause showed the highest values 
were within 30 seconds of the event for all indicators.  The Window Spread and Price Impact 
indicators seemed to be slightly better as early warning predictors. 
 
Fi
gure 10: Indicator Advance Warning PDF and CDF 
Finally, we compared the reliability of the predictive capabilities of the five indicators using receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) curves.  Figure 11 illustrates the performance of the indicators in 00.20.40.60.8
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Probability  
VPIN Window PH Price Impact OBWA
00.20.40.60.81
54.543.532.521.510.50Probability  
Min before Flash Crash  
VPIN Window PH Price Impact OBWA00.20.40.60.81
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.000.10.20.30.40.50.6
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Probability  00.20.40.60.81
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0Normal Price Decline PDF & 1 – CDF  for Indicators  
00.20.40.60.81
54.543.532.521.510.50
Min before Flash Crash  Flash  Crash  PDF & 1 – CDF  for Indicators  
MS MS 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   20 relation to the true-positive state (a flash crash was predicted and occurred) and false-positive state 
(a flash crash was predicted but did not occur) as discrimination thresholds were varied.  Measures 
of the maximum value were observed for the indicators at 30-second intervals from 5 minutes to 30 
s
econds before the event of a market pause.  Figure 11 shows the strongest predictive power at 30 
seconds , because it had the most predictive power, as seen in figure 9.  
 
Figur
e 11: ROC Curves of Indicators: 30-Second Interval (Left) and Scale Modified of 30 –Second Interval 
(Right)  
As the results show, no indicator of a market ’s resiliency and susceptibility to a mini flash crash is 
simple or perfect.  The indicators focusing on measuring the state of the order book were able to 
predict the mini flash crash with the highest degree of accuracy.  H owever, none of these individual 
indicators could encompass the dynamics of order flow and the state of the order book.   
Combining the best of each of the measures into a hybrid  indictor provided  the stronge st predictive 
value and an earlier warning signal.  Using logistic regression, we found the predictive power of the 
weighting the Window (62 percent), Manual (19 percent) and OBWA (19 percent ) Spread indicators 
seem to be significant in combination, resulting in a more trustworthy early-warning indicator that 
functions both when a market is near equilibrium and when high quantities of marketable orders are 
being placed.   
It is important to note that the hybrid indicator gives a high true-p ositive- to-false-p ositive rate, as 
seen in the expanded portion of the ROC curve in Figure 11.  This rate is an important 
consideration when determining if an acceptable indicator exists for implementing a new market 
policy in advance of a potential price destabilization, such as stopping a live trading system.  The 
high true-positive- to-false-positive rate of the hybrid indicator is a good sign that an indicator 
market participants and exchanges could trust m ay exist for financial markets. 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9 1True -Positive  
False -Positive  
VPIN Window PH Price Impact OBWA Random Hybrid00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
False -Positive  
MS 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   21  
Figure 12: Book during a Lower Resiliency Event. AT = dotted , Manual = solid 
A second interesting result of our simulation is the difference in predictive power observed in the 
OBWA and Manual spread indicators.  The predictive power of the OBWA indicator is typically 
stronger showing that automated trading behavior is not overly skewing market liquidity during the 
most extreme points, assuming that behavior is constant.  Yet, during tipping points, resting orders 
placed by automated trader can hide the real spread in demand and supply otherwise evident from 
the manually placed bid-ask resting orders, which would be demonstrated by a growing gap of tick s 
between the best bid-ask.  Figure 12 demonstrates this point, showing an example of an order book 
where automated trading orders make the spread appear tighter than the best manual placed orders 
could support . Consequently, demand and supply appear to be closely matched, which might serve 
as a catalyst for needless trading to occur. 
6
.  Vetting Measure Performance U sing Real Data 
A
s a form of validation of the results on simulated data; we used two real-world datasets to examine 
the pe
rformance of indicators.  These tests required obtaining Level 6 datasets so  we could 
accurately reconstruct the order book, tracking each limit order as it was entered, modified, and 
removed from the limit order book, as well as the execution of other order types to accurately 
reconstruct events.  In addition, we gave each order an identifier that classified it as belonging to an 
automated trader or manual.  The final difficulty was to find events that occurred in single order 
book markets and which, more importantly, experienced a mini flash crash like event. 
We used two unique data sets to investigate the predictive power of the indicators: 
i. September 19, 2012.  Drop in the front month WTI Crude Oil Futures market when the 
price of dropped $4 over four minutes (much of which occurred during 30 seconds of that 
period) and reached its low at 12:55PM CST.   
ii. The Flash Crash of May 6, 2010.  The crash originated in the front month E-Mini S&P 500 
Futures market [CFTC & SEC.  2010] where the price dropped 3 percent over four minutes.  
At 1:45PM CST, it reached its low when the Chicago Mercantile Exchange circuit breaker 
was triggered before the price was able to recover in the contract.   
Using four days of data, three full days selected between 2011 and 2012 and the full day from the 
day of the price events previously mentioned, we examined the indica tors’ behavior  (see Appendix A 
for market statistic to compare to simulation).  By comparing values on  normal days to those seen 
during price- event days, we were able to construct a “likelihood ratio” for  each indicator to 
represent how it changed  from a market acting normally without a flash event to one experiencing a 
flash event. 


OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   22   
 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝐶𝑟𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝐿𝑖𝑘𝑒𝑙𝑖ℎ 𝑜𝑜𝑑 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 = 1−𝐶𝐷𝐹(𝐹)
1−𝐶𝐷𝐹(𝑁) 
N: normal day data  
F: flash day  data 
  
The results for real market data are shown in Figure 13 and were similar to those in the simulated 
data sets.  We observed the Window Spread indictor as the most confident indicator of the group 
before the lowest price observed in the set.  However, the MS and OBWA indicators were able to 
show earlier warning signs of the markets becoming abnormal.  Using  the three in combination as a 
hybrid indicator, we were able to get the best of the both with observing a ratio above 100 signaled 
the likelihood of a flash crash more than a minute in advance of the worst phase of the two price 
events.   
 
 
 
Figure 13: WTI Crude Oil (top) & E-Mini S&P 500 (bottom) Futures Price Events 
 
  92009300940095009600970098009900
1101001000
12:49:21.10 12:50:21.10 12:51:21.10 12:52:21.10 12:53:21.10 12:54:21.10 12:55:21.10
WTI Contract Price  Likelihood Ratio of Flash Crash  
VPIN Window PH
Price Impact OBWA Hybrid
Price
510005150052000525005300053500540005450055000555005600056500
1101001000
1:39:48.60 1:41:18.60 1:42:48.60 1:44:18.60 1:45:48.60 1:47:18.60 1:48:48.60 1:50:18.60
E-Mini S&P 500 Contract Price  Likelihood Ratio of Flash Crash  
VPIN Window
PH Price Impact
OBWA Hybrid
PriceMS 
MS 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   23 7.  Conclusions 
Although access to the full scope actual market data is limited, data describing almost everything that 
happens in markets does exist and could be made available, allowing for a complete picture of the 
markets.  The challenge is to determine how to best make use of this overwhelming amount data to 
keep order in the markets . T his paper discusses the available data, how it relates to the price 
discovery process, and the challenges and possible solutions of using it to understand market 
stability.   
Effective analysis of the electronic order book’s microstructural data has been limited by both the 
data’s accessibility, because of size and complicated structure, and the lack of a controlled 
environment to examine it.  Through the development and application of an agent -based model 
faithfully replicating the limit order book structure, we were able to produce normally sensitive and 
private data in a controlled environment. 
We then examin ed the different levels of market data produced from the model and relationships to 
the price discovery process. We have in this paper identified a possible set of data driven indicators 
that could provide a level of predictive capability to potentially avoid destabilizing pricing events.  
Applying the se indicators developed comparing market simulation data to actual market data, we 
found advance warning signals could be detected a full one minute before two well-documented 
market flash crash events occurred. 
The results of our work demonstrates that with available data, underlying market microstructure 
state of the order book can be a more accurate predictive indicator of market’s resiliency than order 
flow, even though order flow is a significant component . These findings not only help to 
demonstrate the important role higher level data can play in regulators ’ assessment of financial 
markets but also how agent-based models can be used as a testing platform for our understanding of 
markets and financial stability.    
 
References 
Anderson, P., Arrow, K., & Pines, D.(1988).  The Economy as an Evolving Complex System.  
Redwood City, Addison-Wesley Co. 
Andersen, T., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.  & Vega, C.  (2007).  Real-time Price Discovery in Global 
Stock, Bond and Foreign Exchange Markets.  Journal of International Economics 73, 2, 251-
277. 
Andersen, T. & Bondarenko, O. (2014). VPIN and the flash crash.  Journal of Financial Markets , 17, 
1-46. 
Bethel, E., Leinweber, D., Rüb el, O., & Wu, K .  (2011 ).  Federal market information technology in 
the post flash crash era: roles for s upercomputing .  In Proceedings of the fourth workshop on 
High performance computational finance ,  23-30.   

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   24 Benic, V.  & Franic.  I.  (2008) .  Stock Market Liquidity: Comparative Analysis of Croatian and 
Regional Markets.  Financial Theory and Practice  32, 4, 477- 498. 
Berger, D., Chaboud, A., Chernenko, S., Howorka, E., & Wright, J.  (2008).  Order flow and 
exchange rate dynamics in electronic brokerage system data .  Journal of International 
Economics 75, 93- 109. 
Brandt, M.  & Kavajecz, K.  (2004) .  Price discovery in the U.S.  Treasury market: The impact of 
order flow and liquidity on the yield curve.  Journal of Finance 59, 2623-2654.   
CFTC & SEC.  (2010) .  Findings regarding the market events of May 6, 2010.  September 30, 2010. 
Challet, D. & Stinchomb e, R. (2001). Analyzing and modeling 1 + 1d.  Physica A: Statistical 
Mechanics and i ts Applications 300, 285-599.  
Clark -Joseph, A .  D.  (2013) .  Exploratory trading .  Unpublished job market paper .  Harvard 
University, Cambridge , MA 
CME Group.  (2013) .  CME MDP Message Statistics.  Web.  http://beta.cmegroup.com/market-
data/distributor/market-data-platform.html   
Cont, R., Kukanov, A., & Stoikov, S. (2013). The price impact of order book events.  Journal of 
Financial E conometrics  12, 1, 47-88. 
Duong, H .  N. & Kalev, P .  S.  (2014) .  Anonymity and the Information Content of the Limit Order 
Book .  Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money . 
Easley, D., López de Prado, M. , O’Hara, M . (2010). The microstructure of the ‘flash crash’: Flo w 
toxicity, liquidity crashes and the probability of informed trading.  Working Paper. 
Easley, D., López de Prado , M., & O’Hara, M. (2011). The microstructure of the flash crash: Flow 
toxicity, liquidity crashes and the probability of informed trading.  Journal of Portfolio 
Management  37, 2, 118 -128. 
Easley, D., López de Prado, M., & O'Hara, M. (2012). Flow toxicity and liquidity in a high-frequency 
world. Review of Financial Studies 25, 1457- 1493.  
Evans, M.  & Lyons, R.  (2002) .  Order flow and exchange rate dynamics.  Journal of Political 
Economy 110, 170- 180. 
Farmer, J. D.,  Patelli,  P., & Zovko, I. (2005). The predictive power of zero int elligence in financial 
markets.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  102, 6,  2254 -
2259.  
Farmer, J. D.  & Foley , D. (2009). The econo my needs agent -based modelling.  Nature  460, 7256,  
685-686. 
Friedman, D. & Rust, J. (1993). The Double Auction Market: Institutions, Theories, and Evidence. 
Redwood City, Addison-Wesley Co. 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   25 Frey, S., Grammig, J.  (2006).  Liquidity supply and adverse selection in a pure limit order book 
market.  Empirical Economics 30, 1007 –1033.  
Gode, D. K. & Sunder, S. (1993). Allocative e ﬃciency of markets with zero-intelligence traders: 
Market as a partial substitute for individual rationality. Journal of Political Economy 101, 1, 119-
137. 
Glosten, L.  (1987) .  Components of the bid ask spread and the statistical properties of transaction 
prices.  Journal of Finance  ,42, 1293 –1307. 
Glosten, L.  (1994) .  Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable?.  Journal of Finance, 49, 
1127- 1162.  
Golub, A., Keane, J., & Poon, S .  H.  (2012) .  High Frequency Trading and Mini Flash Crashes .  
arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.6667 . 
Harris, L.  (2003) .  Trading and Exchanges: Market Microstructure for Practitioners.  Oxford 
University Press.  New York. 
Hasbrouck, J.  ( 1991) .  Measuring the information content of stock trades.  Journal of Finance, 46, 
179-207. 
Hasbrouck J.  (1995) .  One security, many markets determining the contributions to price discovery.  
Journal of Finance, 50, 1175 –1199 
Hasbrouck, J., & Saar, G. (2013). Low -latency trading.  Journal of Financial Markets,  16, 4, 646 -679.  
Hayes, R., Todd, A., Chaidarun, N., Tepsuporn, S., Beling, P. & Scherer, W. (2014).  An Agent-Based 
Financial Simulation for Use by Researchers . Available at SSRN  
Hendershott, T., Jones, C .  M., & Menkveld, A .  J.  (2011).  Does algorithmic trading  improve 
liquidity?.  The Journal of Finance , 66, 1 -33. 
Johnson, N. , Zhao, G., Hunsader, E., Meng, J., Ravindar, A., Carran, S., & Tivnan, B . (2012).  
Financial black swans driven by ultrafast machine ecology.  Available at SSRN . 
Kaldor, N. (1961).  Economic growth and capital accumulation. The Theory of Capital, Macmillan, 
London.   
Kim, Y.  & Yang, J.  (2004).  What makes circuit breakers attractive to financial markets? A survey.  
Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 13, 109 –146. 
Kirilenko, A., Kyle, A., Samadi, M.  & Tuzun, T.  (2011).  The Flash Crash: The Impact of High 
Frequency Trading on an Electronic Market.  Available at SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1686004 
Krantz, M.  (2011) .  Mini Flash Crashes Worry Traders.  USA Today.  16 May 2011.  Web.  
<http://www.usatoday.com/money/markets/ 2011 -05-16-mini-flash-crashes-market-
worry_n.htm>. 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   26 Love, R., Payne, R.  (2008).  Macroeconomic news, order flows, and exchange rates .  Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 467- 488. 
Macal, C .  M., & North, M .  J.  (2010) .  Tutorial on agent -based modelling and simulation .  Journal 
of Simulation  4, 3, 151 -162. 
Maslov, S. (2000). Simple model of a limit order-driven market. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and 
its Applications, 278, 571- 578. 
Menkveld.  A.  J.  (2010) .  High frequency trading and the new market maker.  Working Paper. 
Nanex.  (2011) .  Flash Crash Analysis Continuing Developments: Flash Equity Failure for 2006, 
2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011.  http://www.nanex.net/FlashCrashEquities/FlashCrash 
Analysis_Equities.html 
O’Hara, M. (2014). High Frequency Market Microstructure. Working Paper. Cornell University.  
Oliven, K.  & Rietz, T.  (2002).  Suckers are born but markets are made: Individual rationality, 
arbitrage and  market efficiency on an electronic futures market .  Management Science. 
Paddrik, M., Hayes, R., Todd, A., Yang, S., Scherer, W.  & Beling, P.  (2012).  An Agent-based 
Model of the E-Mini S&P 500 and the Flash Crash.  IEEE Computational Intelligence for 
Financial Engineering and Economics.   
Preis, T., Golke, S., Paul, W. and Schneider, J. J.  (2006). Multi-Agent  Based Order Book Model Of 
Financial Markets, Europhysics Letters, 75 (3), pp. 510516. 
SEC.  (2010) .  Concept release on equity market structure.  Release No.  34-61358; File No.  S7-02-
10. 
SEC.  (2012) .  Investor Bulletin: New Measures to Address Market Volatility.  Release 23 July 2012.  
Web <http://www.sec.gov/investor/alerts/circuitbreakersbulletin.htm> 
Subrahmanyam, A .  (1994) .  Circuit  Breakers and Market Volatility: A Theoretical Perspective .  The 
Journal of Finance .  49: 237–254.   
Wah, E.  & Wellman, M. P. (2013 ). Latency arbitrage, market fragmentation, and efficiency: a two -
market model. In  Proceedings of the fourteenth ACM conferen ce on Electronic commerce , 
855-872. 
Zhang, F.  (2010) .  High-Frequency Trading, Stock Volatility, and Price Discovery.  Working Paper. 
 
Appendix A 
  
Trader Type  #of Traders  Rate of New 
Order s Position Limits  Market Volume  
Small  6880  7200 sec  -∞ – ∞ 1% 
Fundamental Buyers  1268  60.0 sec  0 – ∞ 9% 
Fundamental Sellers  1276  60.0 sec  -∞ –0 9% 

OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH  
www.treasury\ OFR   27 Market Makers  176 20.0 sec -120 – 120 10% 
Opportunistic  5808  120 sec  -120 – 120 33% 
High Frequency  16 0.35 sec  -3000 – 3000  38% 
Manual  15232  3308 sec  -∞ – ∞ 52% 
AT 192 18.1 sec  -360 – 360 48% 
Table 1 : Simulated S&P 500 E-Mini Market Participation 
 
 
 
 
 

